Araque KA et al. Updates in Thyroid Cancer … Horm Metab Res 2020; 52: 562–577ReviewIntroduction There have been several advances in the treatment of thyroid can - cer over the past couple of decades. This has been possible due to improvements in diagnostic and therapeutic modalities and the advent of novel molecular targeted therapies. Thyroid cancers can be broadly classified based on their cell of origin. The cancers that arise from the endoderm-derived follicular cells comprise of differ- entiated thyroid cancer (DTC) [which in turn comprises of papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) and follicular thyroid cancer (FTC)], anaplas - tic thyroid cancer (ATC), and poorly differentiated thyroid cancer . Medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) arises from the neural crest-de - rived C-cells . Thyroid cancers can occur either sporadically, or as a part of a genetic or a familial condition [such as familial non-medullary thyroid cancer, multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 2A and 2B, Cowden syndrome, Carney complex] . Classification of the various forms of thyroid cancer and their genetic hallmarks is provided in ▶ Table 1. The incidence of thyroid cancer has increased significantly in the United States and worldwide, driven predominantly by the in - creased annual incidence of DTC. The incidence of MTC has been relatively stable . While increased DTC incidence has been attrib - uted to sonographic detection of small PTCs, there is evidence of an increase of all stages of DTC [3, 4]. Despite this, the mortality Review Updates on the Management of Thyroid Cancer Authors Katherine A. Araque1 * , Sriram Gubbi2 * , Joanna Klubo-Gwiezdzinska2 Affiliations 1 Endocrinology Department, Pacific Neuroscience Institute, John Wayne Cancer Institute, Santa Monica, CA, USA 2 Metabolic Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA Key words thyroid cancer, differentiated, medullary, anaplastic, updates received 03.08.2019 accepted 19.12.2019