Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is one of the most aggressive solid tumours in humans. It is a rare but extremely aggressive type of cancer that arises from the follicular cells of the thyroid gland. In contrast to differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC) cells (which can be classified into papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) and follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC)), ATC cells do not retain any of the biological features or functions of normal follicular cells, such as iodine uptake, thyroglobulin synthesis and TSH dependence, with the latter determining the growth and biosynthetic functions of thyrocytes 1 . The clinical course of ATC is characterized by aggressive local disease, high rates of metastasis and rapidly fatal clinical outcomes; with rare exceptions, nearly all patients die within 6 months of developing ATC 2-4 . Currently, no therapies are available to cure or to prolong the survival of patients with ATC. However, several new drugs for the treatment of ATC, mainly tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), have been tested or are under current evaluation in phase II clinical trials. The preclinical rationale for the use of these drugs is related to new findings over the past decade on the molecular biology of ATC. In this Review, we provide a clinical overview of ATC by discussing the epidemiology, risk factors and the main clinical manifestations of this disease. A thorough description of the histopathological features of ATC is provided, which is a key factor in the diagnosis of such a rare type of cancer and which excludes the diagnosis of other similar forms of cancer such as lymphoma, medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) or poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma (PDTC). Both genetic and molecular profiling of ATC are also highlighted, which are both contributing to a better understanding of the onset, development and outcomes of ATC. Importantly, ongoing clinical trials with next-generation treatments are discussed, and we provide a perspective on both future and novel therapeutic options. In addition, this Review is

also a call to join the clinical and scientific communities to better address this rare and lethal disease. Networking between clinicians and basic research scientists will be a key factor in generating better insights into ATC and in carrying out studies with larger samples and cohorts. Finally, we briefly discuss the needs of patients with ATC who are dealing with a disease that has such a poor prognosis.
Epidemiology ATC is a very rare malignancy that accounts for 1-2% of all thyroid cancers, which in turn represent only 3.6% of all human tumours [4][5][6] . Owing to the rarity of this disease, the true incidence of ATC is not known but has been reported to be higher in Europe than in the United States 7 . Currently, the incidence of ATC is estimated to be 1-2 cases per million people per year in USA 4 . Peak incidence is in the sixth and seventh decades of life, with most affected patients over 50 years of age and with a female to male ratio of 1.5:2 (REF. 2). Although ATC accounts for less than 2% of all thyroid tumours, 14-39% of deaths related to thyroid carcinoma are attributable to ATC 5,8 . The median survival time is approximately 5-6 months, and only 10-15% of patients survive 2 years after presentation 2,[9][10][11] . The prevalence of ATC is rather low owing to its lethality, varying from 1.3% to 9.8% (median: 3.6%) of all thyroid cancers across different geographic areas 9 .
Although the number of DTC cases observed worldwide has increased in the past two decades 10 , the incidence of ATC has markedly decreased 4 . An Italian report noted that the incidence of ATC decreased from 11% to 5% between 1979 and 1989 (REF. 11), and similar decreases have been noted in several other countries 12 . These findings might be attributed to both the early detection of small tumours due to the widespread use of ultrasonography 4,13 , and increases in dietary iodine content via salt supplementation reducing the incidence of endemic goitre, which is highly associated with ATC [13][14][15] . However, there are also other reasons for the reduction in the incidence of ATC. For example, improvements in histological diagnosis facilitated by novel immunohistochemistry techniques have enabled the reclassification of several cases of ATC as lymphomas or undifferentiated MTC 16,17 . In addition, improvements in socioeconomic status have also influenced the accuracy of early diagnosis 14 .

The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) defines all cases of ATC as stage IV, and primary tumours are always classified as stage T4. In stage IVA disease, tumours are intrathyroidal (T4a) and are without lymph node involvement or distant metastases (N0 and M0, respectively), and, in stage IVB, the primary tumour exhibits gross extrathyroid extension (T4b; any N and M0). In stage IVC disease, patients have distant metastases (any T, any N, M1) 18,19 . The main risk factors for ATC include an age over 65 years, a history of radiation exposure to the chest or neck, and/or a longstanding goitre (that is, an enlarged thyroid). The most important prognostic factors are age, sex, local tumour extension (T stage) and the presence of distant metastasis (M stage) 20 . Poor prognostic factors include male sex, age >60 years and extrathyroidal tumour involvement. Conversely, younger female patients (<65 years old) with small (<5 cm or intrathyroidal) tumours and no distant metastases have a favourable prognosis 2,20,21 .

The most frequent symptoms of ATC are local and are thus related to mechanical compression, such as hoarseness, cervical pain, dysphagia, dyspnoea and stridor 15 . Approximately 97% of patients with ATC present with a rapidly enlarging thyroid mass ranging from 3 cm to 20 cm in size 15,21 , with the volume usually doubling within 1 week 22 . Haemorrhage into the thyroid mass might manifest as rapid enlargement accompanied by pain, and the appearance of haemoptysis might indicate the extension of the tumour into the trachea. Cervical lymph node and recurrent laryngeal nerve involvement are noted in up to 40% and 30% of patients, respectively [23][24][25] . Adjacent structures might also be affected in up to 70% of patients, including muscle (65%), trachea (46%), oesophagus (44%) and larynx (13%) 26,27 (FIG. 1). Systemic symptoms include anorexia and weight loss, as well as shortness of breath with pulmonary metastases. Distant metastases are found in 50% of patients at the time of diagnosis, and approximately 25% of patients will develop metastases during the course of their disease 27 . The lung is the most common metastatic site (80%), followed by bone Nature Reviews | Endocrinology R L (6-16%) and brain (5-13%) 8,21,28,29 . The rapid local progression of ATC, which often results in suffocation, is the most frequent cause of death in affected patients 30 .

The histopathology of ATC varies from patient to patient, and often within the same tumour at the intratumoural level. These tumours generally contain a heterogeneous mixture of spindled, epithelioid and pleomorphic giant cells (FIG. 2a,b), which makes the diagnosis of ATC challenging for pathologists. The predominance of one of these cell types gives rise to a specific histological pattern, the most common of which is the spindle cell pattern (approximately 50% of patients), followed by the pleomorphic giant cell pattern (approximately 30-40% of patients) and the squamoid pattern (less than 20% of patients) 31 . Microscopic variants, such as the paucicellular variant, rhabdoid variant and small cell variant, are rarely observed. The paucicellular variant can mimic a benign process, such as Riedel thyroiditis, both clinically and histologically; this variant of ATC is morphologically characterized by the presence of only scattered tumour cells, typically spindle-type cells, which are embedded within a dense infiltrative fibrous stroma with chronic inflammatory infiltrate 32 . The rhabdoid variant is characterized by a proliferation of cells with dense globoid hyaline inclusion. The presence of rhabdoid cells is observed in 10% of ATC and in up to one-third of PDTC; however, cases with a prominent pattern of rhabdoid cells are particularly rare 33 . The term 'small cell' carcinoma now seems to be an old and generic term that is used to indicate all tumours composed of undifferentiated small-sized neoplastic cells. With the advent of immunohistochemistry, all thyroid tumours that resemble undifferentiated small cell carcinoma have been reclassified as lymphomas, MTC or PDTC 31,34 .
Some features are common to all histological patterns, including invasiveness, extensive tumour necrosis, marked nuclear pleomorphism and high mitotic activity 31 (FIG. 2c). All neoplastic cells have pleomorphic nuclei that feature highly irregular nuclear contours and thick, coarse chromatin. Mitoses are typically numerous, and atypical mitotic figures are sometimes observed, which frequently have a tripolar shape that consists of three radiating spokes from a centre hub (FIG. 2d; the arrow indicates a tripolar mitosis). This type of mitotic figure indicates that mitosis is not proceeding normally and is considered a definitive sign of malignancy. In addition, ATC cells are arranged in solid sheets and do not form follicles or colloids, and colloids can be observed in entrapped non-neoplastic thyroid cells or well-differentiated carcinoma areas 31 (FIG. 2e).

In ATC, immunohistochemistry is commonly used to establish epithelial differentiation 35 . Nevertheless, the absence of immunoreactivity for epithelial markers does not exclude the diagnosis of ATC. Antibodies that are targeted against cytokeratins, especially lowmolecular-mass cytokeratins (such as antibody CAM 5.2, which detects cytokeratins 8, 18 and 19), are the most frequently positive epithelial markers. However, certain technical factors (such as keratin antibody type, method of antigen retrieval and number of different cytokeratins) are responsible for wide variations in the degree of immuno reactivity among these markers (from 45% to 91%) 35,36 . As a result, the immunoreactivity of anti-cytokeratin antibodies is usually weak and focal.
Thyroglobulin is a substrate for the synthesis of T 4 and T 3 , and is important for the storage of iodine and the inactive forms of thyroid hormone; it is produced and secreted exclusively by thyroid cells 1 . Thyroglobulin immunoreactivity in ATC is controversial, reportedly ranging from 0% to 50%, and is often characterized by weak and ambiguous positivity 37 . The interpretation of thyroglobulin staining can be affected by the entrapment of non-neoplastic follicular cells at the invasive front of the carcinoma and the release of thyroglobulin from entrapped follicles followed by secondary diffusion into the cytoplasm of neoplastic cells -these events might give a false impression of thyroglobulin immunoreactivity in neoplastic ATC cells 38 . Another marker of thyroid differentiation is thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1; also known as homeobox protein NKX2.1), which is only rarely expressed in ATC. TTF1 expression is tissue specific, and it is expressed only in the thyroid, lung and diencephalon 39 . TTF1 is transcriptionally active in the human thyroid and is present in the nucleus of thyroid follicular cells. Along with other transcription factors, TTF1 is considered to be a major switch in the regulation of thyroid gene expression for thyroglobulin, thyroperoxidase (TPO), TSH receptor (TSHR) and the sodium/iodide symporter (NIS; which is encoded by SLC5A5) 36,40,41 .
In summary, low-molecular-mass cytokeratins remain the most useful markers for the histopathological evaluation of ATC. Although they are not specific to the

ATC often originates in an abnormal thyroid gland. A long history of goitre has been reported in >80% of patients 24 , and DTC is associated with ATC in some patients, varying from 7% to 89%, according to different studies 23 . PTC, particularly the aggressive tall cell variant, is the most common type of carcinoma to coexist with ATC (FIG. 2f), followed by the conventional or oncocytic type of FTC 42,43 . PDTC might also be observed (FIG. 2 g). Although the presence of coexisting PTC, FTC or PDTC could suggest the development of ATC from a welldifferentiated thyroid carcinoma, cases of pure ATC (particularly those found in patients younger than 50 years old) strongly support the hypothesis of a direct transformation of a normal follicular cell to a completely undifferentiated cell that can be recognized as a thyroid cell only on the basis of the site of development. Currently, as described in more detail below, molecular patterns of oncogenic alterations are useful in distinguishing PDTC from ATC, as well as other thyroid tumour histotypes. Moreover, ATC tumours that harbour mutations typically found in PTC could be considered to have developed from PTC lesions 44,45 .

Another feature of ATC is the high proportion of tumour-associated macrophages, which are interspersed with cancer cells 46 (FIG. 2 h,i). Among tumour-associated macrophages, classically activated M1 macrophages are responsible for phagocytosis in response to type 1 T helper cytokines 47 . Conversely, alternatively activated M2 macrophages 47,48 are responsible for immunosuppression and trophic activity in response to type 2 T helper cytokines 49 . In advanced thyroid cancer, increased tumour-associated macrophage density is associated with decreased cancer-related survival, probably owing to the pro-tumorigenic M2 characteristics of these macrophages 46 . In addition, remarkably strong correlations exist between increased tumour-associated macrophage density and histological grade, tumour invasiveness and decreased cancer-related survival in PDTC 46 . Studies using immunostaining indicate that tumour-associated macrophages are present in ATC to variable degrees, ranging from 22% to 95% 46,50,51 . ATCs exhibit a very dense network of interconnected ramified tumour-associated macrophages (RTAMs; elongated, thin ramified cytoplasmic extensions that result in a microglia-like appearance) that are in direct contact with intermingled cancer cells. This network has been found in all studied cases and seems to be specific to ATC, as it is not found in DTC 50 . However, this network is also present in other advanced human cancers that metastasize to the thyroid, and so, although rare, these other cancer types must always be considered in a differential diagnosis 52 .

As the histological features of ATC are variable and the immunohistochemical markers of differentiation (thyroglobulin and TTF1) are frequently lost, the differential diagnosis of ATC can be very broad. It is important to properly distinguish ATC from PDTC because the therapeutic approaches and chances of survival are substantially different. PDTC has been considered a controversial diagnosis for many years [53][54][55] . Many authors have emphasized the extensive variations in the diagnostic criteria of PDTC, which is generally considered the bridge between well-differentiated carcinomas and ATC, with respect to both morphology and cellular behaviour [53][54][55] . In an effort to reach a consensus to provide reproducible diagnostic criteria for PDTC, a group of expert thyroid pathologists published the Turin proposal 56 . In this consensus, PDTC is defined as a neoplasm that is derived from follicular epithelial cells with specific characteristics, including a solid, trabecular or insular growth pattern; the absence of conventional nuclear features of PTC; and the presence of additional features, such as convoluted nuclei, mitotic activity (≥3 mitoses per 10 high power fields (HPFs)) or necrosis. Compared with ATC, PDTCs have a more homogenous cell population and lack substantial pleomorphism or marked atypia of the nuclei. Moreover, necrosis is usually less prominent in PDTC and is mainly found in focal areas, as compared with the homogenous distribution in ATC. Immunohistochemical staining patterns confirm the theory of a continuum from well-differentiated tumours to ATC through PDTC. Keratins, thyroglobulin and TTF1 are strongly expressed in well-differentiated carcinomas and usually less intensely in PDTCs, whereas both thyroglobulin and TTF1 are lost in ATC, which also retains only focal and weak expression of keratins.
ATC can be confused with a large variety of thyroid lesions, including well-differentiated thyroid carcinomas with uncommon patterns (that is, squamous metaplasia or fasciitis-like stroma), Riedel thyroiditis (which mimics the paucicellular variant of ATC), MTC (which sometimes shows features of dedifferentiation) and very unusual primary thyroid carcinomas (such as spindle epithelial tumours with thymus-like differentiation and carcinomas with thymus-like elements) 31,55 . In all these cases, the frank nuclear pleomorphism, hyperchromasia, necrosis and mitotic activity that are commonly seen in ATC are absent 55 . Other tumours that mimic ATC include some sarcomas, metastatic carcinomas from other sites, melanomas and lymphomas 31 . Generally, the clinical history of the patient (mostly a pre-existing malignancy), precise knowledge of the anatomic site of the neoplastic mass and immunohistochemical staining can provide useful information to make this type of differential diagnosis. For example, melanomas will be positive for S-100, homatropine methylbromide-45, HMB-45 and Melan-A, whereas lymphomas typically express leukocyte common antigen (LCA) and other specific markers 31 . Currently, specific molecular profiles of different human tumours can distinguish primary thyroid cancer from metastatic lesions that are secondary to other cancers, even when the morphology of the tumour cells is undistinguishable from that of other tumour cells 57 .

Tumoural progression to ATC has been attributed to a multistep dedifferentiation process that starts in a pre-existing DTC lesion 58 . This hypothesis is supported by the evidence that BRAF, NRAS and HRAS mutations 59 (which occur in approximately 60%, 8.5% and 3.5% of PTC, respectively) can be found at a higher frequency in ATC tumours that contain areas of DTC than in those that do not contain areas of DTC [60][61][62][63] . In ATC tumours that contain areas of DTC, BRAFV600E mutations have been detected in both components of the same tumour 61 , which suggests that BRAF mutations have a role in the development of ATC from DTC. Therefore, the process of dedifferentiation is probably caused by the progressive accumulation of somatic mutations in malignancyrelated genes, particularly TP53 and genes that encode proteins involved in the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-AKT pathway 64,65 .
In the past couple of years, three studies using a next-generation sequencing (NGS) approach have described the genomic and transcriptomic landscape of ATC 45,66,67 . These studies demonstrated that ATC is characterized by the accumulation of several different oncogenic alterations (TABLE 1). Compared with DTC, which is characterized by mutually exclusive driver mutations 59 , the genetic profile of ATC is defined by the presence of two or more mutations (FIG. 3a). According to data collected by Landa et al. 45 , Jeon et al. 67 and Kunstman et al. 66 , the median number of single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) in ATC is six, four or two, respectively. These studies also demonstrated a novel profile of mutated driver genes in ATC. Some of these variants were previously reported in Sanger sequencing studies 65,[68][69][70] , but their prevalence was low with respect to that found in the NGS-based studies. In addition, other variants identified by the NGS studies had not previously been reported. This finding is probably the result of the application of very sensitive techniques such as those used in the NGS approach. The most frequently altered gene in ATC is TERT, which encodes the reverse transcriptase component of the telomerase complex and is highly expressed in most human cancer cells 71 . Sanger sequencing facilitated the identification of the 1,295,228 C>T (C228T) and the 1,295,250 C>T (C250T) TERT promoter mutations in cases of advanced thyroid cancer, and the prevalence of TERT promoter mutations was found to be 50% 45 and 33% 72 in cases of ATC. NGS showed that the prevalence of TERT promoter mutations was actually 73% 45 and that these mutations were often associated with other genetic alterations (FIG. 3b).
In addition to TERT mutations, which are not specific to ATC but which characterize several different types of advanced human cancer, TP53 mutations have a very important role in ATC tumorigenesis. The overall prevalence of inactivating TP53 mutations 73 , which varied slightly in the aforementioned studies, is approximately 58% 45,66,67 . TP53 mutations frequently occur in BRAFpositive ATC 45 . Interestingly, Landa et al. 45 reported that none of the nine patients with TP53-positive ATC in their study had any mutations in components of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, supporting the hypothesis that ATC can also develop independently from pre-existing DTC 45 . This hypothesis is also supported by the observation that, when a tumour contains both well-differentiated and undifferentiated histological regions, TP53 mutations are restricted to the undifferentiated areas of the tumour [74][75][76] . These data indicate that TP53 inactivation probably has a direct role in triggering either tumour dedifferentiation of well-differentiated thyroid cancer cells or direct progression from normal thyroid cells to PDTC and/or ATC. In addition to TP53, EIF1AX (which encodes X-linked eukaryotic translation initiation factor 1A), a gene associated with eukaryotic translation initiation, is reportedly associated with progression from DTC (particularly from FTC) to ATC, as EIF1AX mutations are closely associated with RAS mutations 45,59 .
Other novel molecular alterations have been identified in ATC, such as mutations in the gene that encodes isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) (found in 2 of 18 (11%) ATC cases) 77,78 and two point mutations in the ALK gene, Leu1198Phe (c.3592C>T) and Gly1201Glu (c.3602G>A) (both found in 1 of 18 (5.55%) ATC cases) 79 . However, their role in ATC tumorigenesis is unclear.
Genomic rearrangements that cause RET-PTC gene fusions are frequently observed in PTC 45,59,80 but are almost absent from ATC 81 or are reported only in a very few cases 82 . In addition to RET rearrangements, 1 of 24 cases with ALK rearrangements 83,84 and 1 case with an NUT-BRD4 rearrangement 45 have been described.
MicroRNAs (mi RNAs) are non-coding RNAs that regulate post-transcriptional gene expression; the impaired regulation of mi RNAs has a crucial role in cancer development. Alterations in miRNA expression are also observed in ATC 62,85 . In particular, miR-146, miR-221, miR-222 and the miR-17-92 cluster are upregulated in ATC 86,87 , and others, such as miR-200, miR-30, let-7d and let-7g, are downregulated 88,89 . Regulation of miRNA expression has been correlated with mutations in genes involved in ATC development. For example, TP53 mutations have been demonstrated to impair the downstream activation of miR-200 (REF. 90). As this specific miRNA has an important role in the control of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), it could be posited that the presence of a TP53 mutation regulates EMT and tumour invasion by controlling miR-200 expression 90 . These molecular alterations represent potential targets for novel therapies that could be clinically relevant in the future.

The rapid onset and progression of ATC requires the immediate involvement of a multidisciplinary team comprising surgeons, radiotherapists, medical oncologists and endocrinologists, who should rapidly reach a consensus regarding the treatment options that can be offered to the patient. According to the American Thyroid Association (ATA) guidelines that were published in 2012 (REF. 18), feasible therapy options include surgery, radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy, and these treatment modalities must be combined to maximize clinical outcomes in terms of both local and systemic disease control 26 . An intensive and multimodal approach, which includes surgical resection and radio-sensitizing therapy plus combined adjuvant chemotherapy, seems to improve local control and survival in some patients with regionally confined ATC 27 . However, this conventional multimodal approach has been demonstrated to be ineffective in patients with advanced, metastatic ATC (stage IVC) 27,91,92 . These patients receive a greater benefit from palliative care, which remains the main method of clinical management, especially in frail and elderly patients, to relieve suffering and to improve quality of life 18,93,94 . Below, we describe the conventional treatments that remain part of the current repertoire of putative therapeutic strategies for these patients.

When feasible, surgery should be performed 95,96 with the aim of achieving complete macroscopic resection of the tumour and microscopically clear resection margins. Complete resection has been identified as a good prognostic factor in several clinical case reports 23,97,98 . Approximately 20% of patients with ATC have coexisting DTC, and complete surgical resection, with or without combined adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy, is associated with improved disease-free survival and overall survival (OS) 21,30,99 . Haigh et al. 95 demonstrated that, in patients who were treated with potentially curative resection, median survival was 43 months, compared with 3 months in patients who were treated with palliative resection (P = 0.002); the median survival of patients treated with only chemotherapy and irradiation was 3.3 months and was not significantly different from the median survival following palliative resection (P = 0.63) 95 . Younger patients (<65 years old) with small lesions (<6 cm) and no distant metastases might be particularly well suited to radical resection 95 . In patients with more advanced disease (lesions >6 cm), surgery followed by chemoradiation could prevent death from suffocation 100 . Many tumours are too advanced to be completely removed by surgery; nevertheless, surgical debulking (that is, removing as much of the tumour mass as possible to relieve pressure on the airways, but without curative intent) seems to improve median survival time, especially when combined with other treatments 18 . Tumour debulking might increase the chance that chemotherapy or radiation therapy will kill all the tumour cells; it might also relieve symptoms or improve survival. Local treatments, such as endotracheal laser excision and endotracheal stent placement, can be performed to reduce local obstructions due to tumour-induced compression (FIG. 4a,b) or intratracheal invasion 101 (FIG. 4c,d). Tracheostomy is performed in patients who are at risk of airway obstruction and who cannot undergo local resection 102 (FIG. 5a,b).

External radiotherapy (either a standard or a hyperfractionated regimen) reduces morbidity and mortality from locoregional complications, and is helpful for delaying local recurrence and for preventing thoracic outlet obstruction 92 . Although radiotherapy can provide substantial benefits with respect to local disease control, it has not been shown to decrease the risk of death in most patients; however, when combined with surgery and chemotherapy, it can prolong short-term survival in some patients 95 . Moreover, hyperfractionated radiation regimens (in which the total dose of radiation is divided into smaller doses and the treatment is provided more than once each day) with a median  96,103 . With this technique, Wang et al. 104 observed an improvement in median OS from 3.2 months to 11.1 months when more than 40 Gy was used 104 . A similar result was obtained in another study that noted a 1-year median OS improvement (54% versus 17%) when 45 Gy or more was used 104 . A more demanding, hyperfractionated regimen seems to reduce toxicity and seems to promote the sparing of normal tissue, so whenever possible this regimen should be the preferred treatment option. However, neither of the two regimens (standard or hyperfractionated) has been demonstrated to be superior to the other in terms of survival improvement 105 . Palliative doses of external adjuvant radiotherapy should also be considered to improve the quality of life of patients with a poor performance status, or with widespread disease or pain.

Regarding chemotherapy, the most effective class of agents in metastatic ATC are the taxanes (paclitaxel or docetaxel), the anthracyclines (doxorubicin) and the platins (cisplatin or carboplatin). Doxorubicin has been a key drug in the treatment of ATC; however, this drug is unable to achieve more than a 20% response rate in patients with advanced ATC (stage IVB) when used alone 106 . Doxorubicin combined with taxanes and/or platins and/or bleomycin has been demonstrated to be more effective than doxorubicin alone. Doxorubicin plus cisplatin seems to be the most effective combination in reducing tumour mass 106 ; therefore, this combination has been the standard of care for many years. Currently, paclitaxel alone also seems to be effective. In a phase II study, 10 of 19 patients with ATC responded to paclitaxel (response rate of 53%), including 1 patient who experienced a complete response and 9 patients who experienced a partial response 107 . The biological activity of taxanes against ATC has also been demonstrated in several other studies 108,109 . Cytotoxic agents, such as gemcitabine and vinorelbine, have shown activity against ATC cell lines 110 , but these drugs have not reached clinical practice owing to their inefficacy in controlling the progression of advanced ATC. Despite efforts to find a chemotherapeutic agent or a combination of agents to modulate ATC progression, systemic adjuvant chemotherapy has not yet produced clinically significant results. Therefore, new treatment modalities are still needed for patients with ATC.

The failure of conventional chemotherapy, both alone and in combination with radiotherapy, to control the progression of ATC and to improve patient outcomes has resulted in the need for novel, molecularly targeted drugs. New targeted therapies that are designed to block the activity of oncogenes that promote cellular growth and oncogenic transformation in ATC are the most promising treatment modalities currently being explored. Below, we address the main preclinical rationale for the use, mechanisms of action and therapeutic efficacy of TKIs and other novel therapies.  The BRAFV600E mutation, TP53 mutations 45,62,67 , increased epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) expression and increased vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) secretion, as well as aberrant activation of the RAS-RAF-MAPK pathway 82,114,115 , are known to be important contributors to ATC initiation and development. These processes are the basis for the development of new therapeutic approaches using multiple TKIs to suppress VEGF-mediated or EGFR-mediated proliferation and to overcome apoptotic pathway defects (for example, defects in nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB), p53 and BCL-2 signalling) and to therefore decrease ATC metastatic potential 116 .
Several TKIs have been tested both preclinically and in clinical trials, and have yielded encouraging results. Below, we summarize the most important results that have been obtained thus far with TKIs in patients with ATC that have not yet been translated into clinical practice.

Imatinib is an oral inhibitor of the ABL kinase, as well as of the KIT receptor and plateletderived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) 117 . This agent has been approved by regulatory agencies (European Medicines Agency (EMA) and FDA) for the treatment of chronic myelogenous leukaemia and gastrointestinal stromal tumours expressing KIT. Preclinical studies have demonstrated that the ABL kinase is overexpressed in ATC cell lines in which TP53 is mutated or deficient and that selective inhibition of ABL kinase activity by imatinib has dramatic cytostatic effects on these cells 118 . Additional data have suggested that, in many cases, ATC cells express functional PDGFRs 119 . For this reason, imatinib was tested in a phase II clinical trial as a therapy for patients with ATC who had been treated with chemoradiation or surgery and who had developed recurrent or metastatic disease outside of the field of radiation 120 . Patients with histologically confirmed ATC who had measurable disease according to RECIST (Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumours) criteria and who were found to express PDGFRs via immunohistochemistry were eligible for the study. Imatinib was administered at a dose of 400 mg orally twice daily, and treatment responses were assessed every 8 weeks. Patients with complete responses, partial responses or stable disease were treated until disease progression was noted. Of eight patients with recurrent and pretreated ATC, two patients exhibited partial responses and four patients exhibited stable disease following imatinib treatment (there are no data for the other two patients). The 6-month progression-free survival (PFS) was 36% and the 6-month OS was 45% 119 . Despite these promising results, imatinib has not yet been evaluated in larger clinical trials, and the drug is not currently available for ATC treatment.

Pazopanib is an oral inhibitor of VEGF receptor (VEGFR), PDGFR and KIT kinases. This agent also inhibits multiple cytochrome P450 enzymes in vitro 121 . The drug mitigates tumour cell growth by blocking key enzymes that are needed for cell growth and by restricting tumour blood flow 121 . The safety and efficacy of this drug in patients with metastatic, rapidly progressive and radioiodine-refractory DTC was tested in a phase II multiinstitutional study in which 16 patients were enrolled; however, trial enrolment was permanently closed owing to insufficient tumour responses according to RECIST criteria, which suggests that pazopanib monotherapy might not be effective against ATC 122,123 . Despite this result, in vitro studies have shown that pazopanib enhances paclitaxel-induced mitotic catastrophe in ATC cell lines 124 . Accordingly, a randomized phase II trial is currently Vemurafenib. Vemurafenib is a BRAF kinase inhibitor that is already approved by both the FDA and the EMA for the treatment of late-stage melanoma 126 . In 2013, an impressive result was obtained with vemurafenib in a 51-year-old patient with ATC who had a PTC component with extensive neck involvement and lung and bone metastases 127 . Vemurafenib at a twice-daily oral dose of 960 mg was started empirically with patient consent; 18 F-FDG-PET and CT of the chest showed almost complete clearing of metastatic disease. A couple of years later, another group reported a similar result in another patient with ATC who was treated with vemurafenib 128 . There was an early clinical response, demonstrating a decrease in subcutaneous metastases; however, a CT scan carried out 2 months after the initiation of vemurafenib treatment showed the rapid progression of disease with metastases to the brain and oesophagus.
Everolimus. Everolimus is a derivative of rapamycin and has been investigated as an anticancer agent owing to its potential to inhibit cell proliferation and growth 129 . The target of everolimus is mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR), a ubiquitously expressed serine/threonine kinase that is a member of the larger PI3K family. Everolimus halts tumour cell growth by blocking key enzymes that control cell growth and by restricting blood flow to the tumour 130 . OS, PFS and toxicity were investigated in a single-arm phase II trial evaluating everolimus in 40 patients with locally advanced or metastatic, unresectable or iodine-refractory thyroid cancer, 6 (15%) of whom had ATC, and almost all the participants (36 of 40; 90%) had received previous treatment before study entry 129 ; PFS was 10 weeks (95% CI 4.8-16.0) and OS was 13 weeks (95% CI 7.4-18.6) in patients with ATC.
Seven patients with ATC were enrolled in another phase II study involving patients with locally advanced or metastatic thyroid carcinoma; only one patient of the seven, a 57-year-old woman, exhibited a near-complete response for 18 months, followed by progressive disease 131 . Everolimus is not currently used for the treatment of ATC owing to the lack of positive data.

Gefitinib is an oral TKI with antineoplastic properties, which are exerted via the inhibition of EGFR activation 132,133 . In an open-label phase II trial, a cohort of patients with radioiodine-refractory, locally advanced, or metastatic thyroid cancer were treated with 250 mg of gefitinib daily 134 . Although gefitinib therapy did not result in any tumour responses, 32% of patients exhibited reductions in tumour volume but did not meet the criteria for a partial response. Moreover, only one patient of five with ATC exhibited stable disease for 12 months, and no response was observed in the remaining four patients with ATC. As a result of this failure, gefitinib is not currently used to treat ATC in clinical practice.
Axitinib. Axitinib is a potent orally administered selective inhibitor of VEGF that facilitates the inhibition of angiogenesis and the restriction of tumour blood flow [135][136][137][138] . A phase II trial studied the efficacy of axitinib in patients with advanced or metastatic thyroid carcinoma, including two patients with advanced-stage thyroid carcinoma, irrespective of tumour histology 139 . The drug showed activity against all histologic subtypes, with a 30% response rate, and with stable disease lasting >16 weeks in 38% of patients. Hypertension was the main adverse effect of treatment. Further studies in larger cohorts of patients with ATC are warranted.

Sunitinib is an oral, multi-targeted TKI that blocks cellular signalling by targeting PDGFRs and VEGFRs, which have key roles in both angiogenesis and tumour cell proliferation 140 . Therefore, the simultaneous inhibition of these targets leads to reduced tumour vascularization, cancer cell death and, ultimately, tumour shrinkage in patients with renal carcinoma 141 . In addition, sunitinib has been demonstrated to be active in vitro and in vivo against activated endothelial and ATC cells through the inhibition of AKT and extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) phosphorylation, and through the downregulation of cyclin D1 (REF. 142). Sunitinib also inhibits KIT, which, when aberrantly activated by mutations, drives the development of most gastrointestinal stromal cell tumours 143 . This drug has been recommended as a second-line therapy for patients with gastrointestinal stromal cell tumours who develop mutations in KIT that confer resistance to imatinib and also for patients who become intolerant to imatinib with respect to adverse effects 144 .
A phase II trial evaluated the effects of sunitinib in locally advanced or metastatic thyroid tumours 145 ; sunitinib was given orally at a dose of 50 mg daily for 28 days, followed by 2 weeks of no therapy. All patients received repeated cycles of treatment until disease progression or unacceptable toxicity was noted, until withdrawal of patient consent or until other withdrawal criteria were met. After discontinuation of treatment and a mandated 28-day follow-up period, patients were only further followed up to collect information regarding additional antineoplastic therapy and survival. The results of this study showed an overall median PFS of 241 days, with a potential clinical benefit observed in patients with advanced DTC 146 ; however, no specific data regarding ATC have been reported.

Sorafenib is an orally active TKI that targets BRAF, VEGFR1, VEGFR2 and RET and that has proapoptotic and antiangiogenic effects in vivo 147 . In preclinical mouse models, sorafenib inhibits the growth of ATC xenografts and improves survival 147 . A small number of patients with metastatic ATC (n = 9), for whom noncurative or standard palliative therapies were available (stage IVC), were enrolled in three different phase II clinical trials; these patients exhibited clinical responses but did not satisfy RECIST criteria [148][149][150] . The clinical efficacy of this drug was tested in another multi-institutional phase II trial involving 20 patients with ATC who had progressed after treatment with cytotoxic chemotherapy (given alone or with radiation) and whose disease was not considered amenable to radiation or surgery with curative intent 151 . Sorafenib was administered at a dose of 400 mg twice daily, and two patients exhibited a partial response (10%), with five patients (25%) exhibiting stable disease. The response durations in the two partial responders were 10 months and 27 months. For the patients with stable disease, the median response duration was 4 months. The overall median PFS time was 1.9 months, but the median OS time and 1-year survival rate were 3.9 months and 20%, respectively. Toxicity was predictable and manageable, as the main adverse effects included hypertension and skin rash. Despite limitations resulting from its small size (n = 20), this study showed that sorafenib has promising activity in ATC, and sorafenib has since been approved for clinical use for advanced PTC and PDTC based on the results of this phase II study.

Lenvatinib is an orally active multi-targeted TKI that acts on VEGFR1, VEGFR2, VEGFR3, PDGFRβ, RET, KIT, fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1), FGFR2, FGFR3 and FGFR4. Lenvatinib does not notably inhibit tumour cell proliferation but abrogates cell migration and invasion 152 . Thus far, lenvatinib has been tested in a phase II trial comprising 43 Japanese patients with various thyroid tumours, 11 of which were classified as ATC. Three of these 11 (27%) patients treated with lenvatinib showed an overall response (OR) and increases in OS of 3.2 months compared with patients who were administered placebo 153,154  In addition, a phase II open-label single-arm multicentre international study has been approved by the FDA, and patient recruitment is ongoing, with July 2018 being the final data collection date for the primary outcome measure 157 . The objective of this study is tied to the results of a preclinical study that demonstrated the antitumoural activity of lenvatinib in five ATC xenograft murine models 158 and to a phase III trial (the SELECT study) that evaluated the role of lenvatinib in advanced, progressive, radioiodine-refractory DTC 159 . Following the SELECT study, which demonstrated a median PFS of 18.3 months in the lenvatinib group versus 3.6 months in the placebo group (hazard ratio for progression or death: 0.21; 99% CI 0.14-0.31; P < 0.001) and a response rate of 64.8% in the lenvatinib group (four complete responses and 165 partial responses) versus 1.5% in the placebo group (P < 0.001) 159 , the drug was approved by both the FDA and the EMA for the treatment of advanced and progressive radioiodine-refractory thyroid tumours. If the planned trial 157 reports favourable results, the drug could also be available for the treatment of patients with ATC.

In addition to TKIs, several new molecules have been developed and evaluated in preclinical and clinical settings for the treatment of ATC. A brief review of the main drugs, mechanisms of action and ongoing studies is provided below.

Combretastatin A4 phosphate (CA4P) is a synthetic, water-soluble, phosphorylated prodrug of the active molecule combretastatin A4. CA4P is a vascular-disrupting agent that inhibits tubulin polymerization and acts selectively on newly formed tumoural endothelial cells 160 . This prodrug has direct antitumour effects in vivo and in vitro, as it destabilizes spindles and induces apoptosis, resulting in neovascular endothelial cell disruption and the interruption of blood flow to the tumour 161 . In addition to its antitumour activity against ATC cell lines, the safety and efficacy of this agent have been demonstrated in phase I and II clinical trials 161 . In a prospective randomized phase II/III multicentre openlabel trial, 80 of 180 planned patients with ATC who were refractory to therapy, who had progressed during or after therapy, or who had relapsed within 6 months following initial combined modality therapy (usually including systemic chemotherapy and radiation) for regionally advanced disease received up to six cycles of carboplatin and paclitaxel with (in the CA4P arm) or without CA4P (in the control arm) 162 . The regimen was well tolerated: grade 1-2 hypertension and grade 3-4 neutropenia were the main adverse effects. The results of the trial indicated that CA4P improves 1-year OS by threefold compared with the control regimen, but this improvement was not significant, probably because of the low statistical power of the small cohort 161 . Nevertheless, this trial represents the largest prospective randomized trial so far conducted for patients with ATC. Results from a phase II trial evaluating conventional chemotherapy (doxorubicin and cisplatin) and radiation therapy combined with CA4P in patients with newly diagnosed regionally advanced ATC 163 are not yet available. CA4P monotherapy was also assessed in a phase II trial involving patients with ATC 164 . The agent was well tolerated in patients with ATC, and stable disease was observed in 7 of 26 patients. The median survival time was 4.7 months, and 23% of the patients survived for 1 year, but no complete responses were observed 165 . A novel multicentre, double-blinded, placebo-controlled, randomized phase III study comparing CA4P plus chemotherapy (paclitaxel and carboplatin) with placebo plus chemotherapy in patients with advanced or metastatic ATC was cancelled before the completion of enrolment owing to very slow patient recruitment 166 .
Crolibulin (EPC2407; Immune Pharmaceuticals), a derivative of combretastatin, was tested in combination with cisplatin in patients with recurrent or metastatic ATC in a phase I/II study that recruited 27 patients in November 2010. At phase I, the primary aims of this study were to assess the safety and tolerability of a 21-day cycle of cisplatin and Crolibulin in dose-seeking cohorts, and at phase II the study aimed to compare the combination of Crolibulin plus cisplatin to cisplatin alone in patients with ATC by assessing the duration of PFS. This study is ongoing but no longer recruiting patients; the final data collection for the primary outcome evaluation was planned for December 2016, however, the results are not yet available 167 .
Efatutazone. Efatutazone (also known as CS-7017) is an orally active synthetic thiazolidinedione peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) agonist. Efatutazone is a potent stimulator of transcriptional activation that is mediated by PPARγ and has remarkable antitumour activity in preclinical models of human ATC. For example, efatutazone inhibited xenograft tumour growth in vivo when administered alone and in combination with paclitaxel in a murine model 168 . The safety, tolerability and efficacy of efatutazone were investigated in a multicentre phase I study that enrolled 15 patients with advanced ATC who had measurable disease by RECIST criteria and at least one lesion (primary or metastatic) that was accessible for biopsy 169 ; the drug was given orally twice daily (0.15 mg, 0.3 mg or 0.5 mg doses) in combination with paclitaxel (which was administered every 3 weeks via intravenous infusion). This study demonstrated that the combination of efatutazone and paclitaxel was safe and well tolerated and that there was a dose-response relationship between efatutazone and biomarker expression 169 . In September 2014, a phase II randomized study comparing the combination of efatutazone and paclitaxel to paclitaxel alone in patients with advanced ATC was initiated and is still recruiting patients 170 . The primary objective of this study is to evaluate whether the combination of paclitaxel and efatutazone improves OS compared with paclitaxel alone. The secondary end points of this study include PFS and the rate of adverse effects. The final data collection for the primary outcome measure is planned for October 2017.

Various other therapeutic approaches are currently under evaluation, either in preclinical studies or in early phase clinical trials that are still accruing patients. Several of these emerging therapeutics are promising candidates for future treatment options in ATC and so deserve to be mentioned.

Cetuximab is a human-murine chimeric monoclonal antibody that targets the ligand-binding domain of EGFR. Treatment with cetuximab alone inhibits the growth and progression of orthotopic ATC xenografts in nude mice, and the combination of this agent and irinotecan was demonstrated to further enhance this antitumoural activity 171 . Owing to these promising preclinical results, further clinical evaluation of cetuximab for the treatment of ATC is warranted.
Bortezomib. Bortezomib is a protease inhibitor that acts through the upregulation of NOXA (also known as phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate-induced protein 1 (PMAIP1)), which is a proapoptotic protein that might interact with the anti-apoptotic proteins of the BCL-2 subfamily, BCL-X L and BCL-2, and results in the apoptotic cell death of malignant cells. Another important mechanism of bortezomib is through the suppression of the NF-κB signalling pathway, which results in the downregulation of its anti-apoptotic target genes 172,173 . In a preclinical study, the effect of bortezomib on a panel of thyroid carcinoma cell lines, originating from papillary, follicular, anaplastic and medullary carcinomas, was evaluated 174 . Bortezomib induced apoptosis in medullary and anaplastic cell lines with IC 50 values that were well within the range of clinically achievable concentrations and that were much lower than the respective IC 50 values of other solid malignancies. The sensitivity of thyroid carcinoma cells to bortezomib was partially decreased by the overexpression of BCL-2 or treatment with insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1), whereas the combination of bortezomib and doxorubicin was synergistic. The synergistic effect of bortezomib with conventional chemotherapy (doxorubicin) warrants clinical trials in humans. Cediranib. Cediranib is a TKI with specificity for VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 that has been demonstrated to block tumour growth and to prolong survival in an ATC murine xenograft model 175 . The main mechanism of action of the compound was through the inactivation of VEGFR2 and downstream signalling in endothelial cells. These effects correlated with its ability to inhibit the proliferation of endothelial cells and to induce their apoptosis both in vitro and in vivo. Interestingly, paclitaxel alone or in combination with cediranib did not have any marked benefits in terms of tumour growth or survival. These results provide strong preclinical evidence to support the design of clinical trials with cediranib in the treatment of ATC.
Immunotherapy. As novel therapeutic options for the treatment of ATC need to be found, additional strategies should be explored in the future, such as immunotherapy-based approaches that attempt to stimulate the immune system to target and kill tumour cells 176 . Programmed death ligand 1 (PDL1), which was initially considered a regulator of cell death, has now been identified as a key checkpoint inhibitory receptor that alters the function of T cells after antigen-mediated stimulation 177 . Inhibitors of PDL1 have been shown to be effective in reducing immune suppression in several human tumours that have high levels of PDL1 expression, such as ovarian cancer, lung carcinoma and melanoma 172,173,178,179 . An increase in both OS and PFS in patients with these cancers who were treated with immunotherapy was recently reported 172,173,178,179 . The roles of these checkpoint inhibitors in thyroid cancer have also recently been explored, showing that PDL1 is highly expressed in advanced DTC and ATC 180,181 ; thus, these tumours represent good candidates for immunotherapy. Considering the limited systemic therapeutic options currently available for patients with ATC, the feasibility and the effectiveness of immunotherapy should be tested in clinical trials.

Although rare, ATC is one of the most aggressive and rapidly lethal human tumours. The median survival time is approximately 6 months, and most patients die of suffocation. The pursuit of novel efficacious therapies to combat ATC, particularly in advanced metastatic stages, is warranted to reduce mortality due to rapid tumour growth and the invasion of important local structures, such as the trachea and oesophagus. Although the efficacy of conventional treatments is still very limited, whenever possible, a multimodal therapeutic strategy that integrates surgery, adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy should be used. As discussed in this Review, a multidisciplinary approach should always be considered, including palliative care as a possible option, especially in light of the negative effects of drug toxicity.
The histol ogical diagnosis of ATC is challenging owing to the existence of several cellular histological patterns and also because of the similarity of ATC to other human tumours, such as lung adenocarcinoma, especially when undifferentiated. However, positive immuno histochemical staining for specific thyroid markers might be useful in the diagnosis of ATC; nevertheless, the experience of the pathologist in recognizing this rare tumour is fundamental. In this Review, we also discuss the molecular mechanisms underlying ATC tumour growth that have generated information of great clinical relevance in the field of contemporary medicine. In fact, because of these molecular findings, large numbers of drugs are becoming available for clinical use or are currently under evaluation. However, the rarity of ATC represents the major limitation in accruing adequate patient numbers to complete prospective studies. In this regard, the challenge over the next 5 years for the clinical and scientific communities will be to make a concerted effort to establish large multicentre clinical trials to demonstrate the effectiveness of novel therapies in ATC, which currently remains without an effective treatment: new therapies are desperately needed.

Author contributions E.M., A.B., E.S., L.A., S.M., G.M., S.S-F., A.R., L.T., F.B. and R.E. researched data for the article. E.M. made a substantial contribution to discussions of the content. E.M., C.R. and L.T. wrote the article. E.M., C.R., P.V. and R.E. reviewed and/or edited the article before submission.

The authors declare no competing interests.

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.