BACKGROUND. Long-term thyroid hormone (TH) therapy BACKGROUND. Long-term thyroid hormone (TH) therapy aiming at the suppression of serum thyrotropin (TSH) has aiming at the suppression of serum thyrotropin (TSH) has been traditionally used in the management of well been traditionally used in the management of well differentiated thyroid cancer (ThyrCa). However, formal differentiated thyroid cancer (ThyrCa). However, formal validation of the effects of thyroid hormone suppression validation of the effects of thyroid hormone suppression therapy (THST) through randomized controlled trials is therapy (THST) through randomized controlled trials is lacking. Additionally, the role Ð if any Ð of TSH effect at lacking. Additionally, the role Ð if any Ð of TSH effect at low ambient concentrations upon human thyroid tumor-low ambient concentrations upon human thyroid tumorigenesis remains unclear. igenesis remains unclear. AIM: Evaluation of the effect of THST on the clinical AIM: Evaluation of the effect of THST on the clinical outcomes of papillary and/or follicular ThyrCa. outcomes of papillary and/or follicular ThyrCa. METHODS. By using a quantitative research synthesis METHODS. By using a quantitative research synthesis approach in a cumulative ThyrCa cohort, we evaluated the approach in a cumulative ThyrCa cohort, we evaluated the effect of THST on the likelihood of major adverse clinical effect of THST on the likelihood of major adverse clinical events (disease progression/recurrence and death). A total events (disease progression/recurrence and death). A total of 28 clinical trials published during the period 1934±2001 of 28 clinical trials published during the period 1934±2001 were identi®ed; only 10 were amenable to meta-analysis. were identi®ed; only 10 were amenable to meta-analysis. Causality was assessed by Hill criteria. Causality was assessed by Hill criteria. RESULTS: Out of 4, 174 patients with ThyrCa, 2, 880 (69%) RESULTS: Out of 4, 174 patients with ThyrCa, 2, 880 (69%) were reported as being on THST. Meta-analysis showed that were reported as being on THST. Meta-analysis showed that the group of patients who received THST had a decreased the group of patients who received THST had a decreased risk of major adverse clinical events (RR risk of major adverse clinical events (RR = = 0.73; CI 0.73; CI = = 0.60± 0.60± 0.88; 0.88; P P < < 0.05). Further, by applying a Likert scale, 15/17 0.05). Further, by applying a Likert scale, 15/17 interpretable studies showed either a `likely' or `question-interpretable studies showed either a `likely' or `questionable' bene®cial effect of THST. Assessment of causality able' bene®cial effect of THST. Assessment of causality between TSHT and reduction of major adverse clinical events between TSHT and reduction of major adverse clinical events suggested a probable association. suggested a probable association. CONCLUSIONS: THST appears justi®ed in ThyrCa patients CONCLUSIONS: THST appears justi®ed in ThyrCa patients following initial therapy. As most primary studies were following initial therapy. As most primary studies were imperfect, future research will better de®ne the effect of imperfect, future research will better de®ne the effect of THST upon ThyrCa clinical outcomes. THST upon ThyrCa clinical outcomes.

Thyroid cancer (ThyrCa) is the commonest endocrine malignancy, with the exception of ovarian cancer. In 1999, approximately 18,000 new cases of this malignancy were diagnosed in the United States (1). The majority of ThyrCas derive from the follicular thyroid epithelium, giving rise to papillary, follicular and anaplastic ThyrCas, whereas medullary ThyrCas originate from the parafollicular cells, which are of neuroendocrine derivation. Papillary and follicular ThyrCas represent the majority (>85%) of thyroid malignancies, are considered ± for the most part ± well differentiated tumors, and have an overall excellent prognosis, with reported 10-year survival rates of 93% and 85%, respectively (2). The above facts notwithstanding, considerable debate continues to exist regarding the initial management of papillary and follicular ThyrCas, as well as the optimal treatment of residual/recurrent metastatic disease; this is due inter alia to the relative rarity of these malignancies and their low mortality rates (3).
The `standard' therapy scheme for papillary and follicular ThyrCa includes surgery (near total/total thyroidectomy), radioactive iodine ( 131 I; RAI) ablation of the surgical remnant and RAI treatment of metastatic disease, and long-term thyroid hormone suppression therapy (THST) (4). The last-named is de®ned by the administration of thyroid hormone (TH), usually in the form of oral levothyroxine (LT4), after thyroidectomy and remnant ablation, at doses suf®cient to decrease serum thyrotropin (TSH) below the lower limit of the normal range, i.e. below 0.4±0.5 mU/l, without symptomatic thyrotoxicosis. In most cases, TSH suppression can be achieved in the face of serum free thyroxine and triiodothyronine levels that are either at the upper limit of the normal range or slightly above it. Supraphysiologic doses of TH decrease pituitary release of TSH, thus inhibiting proliferation of any residual TSH-dependent thyroid tissue (5). The rationale behind the use of THST in ThyrCa patients has traditionally been based on the theoretical (and logical) assumption that the growth of residual malignant ThyrCa foci remaining (or developing) following thyroidectomy and initial RAI treatment is TSH-dependent, and, hence, that THST can improve clinical outcomes in this disease. However, the above assumption remains formally unproven, as the expression levels of TSH receptors (TSHRs) are much lower in malignant cells than in their normal counterparts (6,7). Furthermore, in some ThyrCas the tumoral TSHR alleles are either deleted or transcriptionally silenced (8), while in other instances the post-TSHR signaling pathways are dysfunctional (9). Finally, in vitro human thyrocyte growth is not regulated by TSH alone, but rather a variety of other factors, such as epidermal growth factor (EGF), insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) and cytokines (10±12). The above theoretical reasons have cast doubts on the bene®t of THST in the management of ThyrCa, despite the prevailing clinical dogma.
The ®rst case report describing the use of TH in the management of ThyrCa was published in 1937 (13). Subsequently, over the past seven decades, additional case reports, case series, and numerous clinical cohort studies have supported the use of THST (14±41). Unfortunately, all of the large observational studies cited above have been limited by: 1) lack of randomization, 2) lack of appropriate controls, 3) absence of blinding, and 4) lack of exclusive focus on the effect of THST on adverse clinical outcomes; therefore, their validity cannot be assessed by evidence-based medicine type of criteria. Furthermore, despite the fact that most of the above studies show some bene®cial effect of THST, the impact of this therapy among ThyrCa patient populations with different prognostic features (and, hence, among diverse risk strata) is yet to be de®ned. Randomized, placebo-controlled trials are not practical in populations of ThyrCa patients due to the relatively low incidence of this malignancy, its prolonged course in cases where residual disease persists, and its favorable overall prognosis. Consequently, meta-analysis± based approaches can be used to answer the question whether any speci®c intervention would affect disease outcome in ThyrCa.
The objective of our analysis is to statistically evaluate the effect of THST in patients with well differentiated papillary and follicular ThyrCa on the likelihood of adverse clinical outcomes, i.e. the combination of disease progression, disease recurrence and mortality, in a compiled patient cohort collected from existing studies addressing this subject.
A quantitative research synthesis approach Ð a metaanalysis variant Ð is used to provide a systematic review and evaluation of available primary study information (42).

A research synthesis approach is used herein, in order to make an assessment based on both quantitative and qualitative data. This technique facilitates the analysis of outcomes due to interventions in clinical conditions, management of which is controversial or poorly documented (43,44). The research synthesis process combines a systematic review of the available biomedical literature, meta-analysis of selected primary studies, review of recently published expert opinions, assessment of causality using modi®ed Hill criteria, practice validation, as well as surveys of specialty practitioners (whenever available) (42). We have used a modi®ed version of this technique with a focus on published literature.

Published studies evaluating THST as a component of ThyrCa management were identi®ed. On-line (MED-LINE and EMBASE) and manual systematic literature searches (1937±2002) were conducted using the Medical Subject Headings (MESH) `thyroid cancer', `thyroid carcinoma', `papillary', `follicular', `thyrotropin', `TSH suppression', `thyroid hormone', `liothyronine', and `levothyroxine'. Both English and non-English language articles were reviewed.

The quality of each study was evaluated using a fourpoint Likert scale based on the descriptors `uninterpretable', `unlikely', `questionable', and `likely' for a cause-effect relationship between THST and adverse clinical outcomes (i.e. disease progression, disease recurrence and/or death from ThyrCa).

Data were extracted only from those primary studies meeting the following criteria: 1) a diagnosis of papillary or follicular ThyrCa was con®rmed or expressly stated in the study, 2) use of THST was documented, 3) clinical outcomes were reported, and 4) a control group of patients existed for comparison.

The compilation of expert opinions was based on the results of a separate literature search that identi®ed relatively recent (1990±2002) English language review articles, opinion statements or editorials that addressed the use of THST as a component of ThyrCa management.

In order to assess the therapeutic ef®cacy of a THST regimen, a measurement of TSH activity is implicitly required. Over the last 20 years, there have been signi®cant advances in the technology relevant to the detection and quanti®cation of TSH (45). Until the early 1980s, radioimmunoassay (RIA) techniques with a functional sensitivity of 1±2 mU/l (1st generation TSH assays) were the only ones available. By the mid 1980s, more sensitive 2nd generation radioimmunometric assays (IRMA's) and immunoenzymometric methods (IEMA's) became available, which could detect TSH at levels as low as 0.1±0.2 mU/l . In the late 1980s, 3rd generation TSH assays with a functional sensitivity of 0.01±0.02 mU/l, and, in the late 1990s, 4th generation TSH assays with a functional sensitivity of 0.001±0.002 mU/l were introduced. Since the TSH assay utilized in each individual primary study will impact any metaanalysis, this information was collected for all studies, in order to interpret the reported ®ndings.
In addition to specifying the lower limit of detection of the TSH assays, identifying the dose of TH administered to achieve TSH suppression is also important for the interpretation of data. The type of TH preparation used for THST varied depending on the time frame of each study. For simplicity, it was assumed that approximately 80 mg LT4 are equivalent to 60 mg (1 grain) United States Pharmacopeia (USP) thyroid (46). The daily dose of LT4 capable of inducing TSH suppression was de®ned as one greater than 1.6 mg/kg (47).

The relationship between THST and clinical outcome was assessed according to a method described by Hill (48). The criteria proposed by this author are frequently used to evaluate epidemiologically a population of studies reporting on the clinical and laboratory outcomes produced by a speci®c therapeutic agent. The Hill criteria include assessment of strength, consistency, speci®city, temporal relationship, biological gradient, biological plausibility, coherence, and experimental evidence for the effect of the agent under consideration. The relationship between a therapeutic intervention and a clinical outcome is interpreted according to the collation of criteria applied to the ®ndings of the primary studies in a cumulative fashion. In this analysis, any individual criterion alone does not supply adequate information to de®ne causality.

Descriptive data are presented as mean + standard deviation (SD) and range of values. An a priori P value of <0.05 was considered signi®cant. Unspeci®ed P values were two-tailed. For each study used in the meta-analysis, an incidence risk ratio (IRR) and 95% con®dence intervals (CIs) were calculated using SAS statistical software (49). A combined relative risk value (RR) was estimated by a Mantel-Haenszel test for all studies cumulatively (49). The Breslow-Day test (chi-squared statistic) was used to assess the homogeneity of results across studies. In metaanalyses where the results of all individual studies are homogenous, this chi-squared statistic is not signi®cant. Thus, the Breslow-Day test assesses whether the distribution of treatment effect sizes among primary studies is compatible with the assumption that differences among them are attributable to random sampling alone.

Twenty-eight reports were identi®ed that evaluated the ef®cacy of THST in ThyrCa; the features of these studies are shown in  22,36). Of the 28 studies, 11 (39.3%) were `uninterpretable' (14,21,22,26,31,34,36, 37, 39±41), 2 (7.1%) showed an `unlikely' effect (20,35), 2 (7.1%) a `questionable' effect (25,33), and the rest (13 or 46.4%) a `likely' effect (15±19, 23, 24, 27±30, 32) of THST on ThyrCa adverse clinical outcomes.
Regarding the 11 uninterpretable studies: in 5/11, all of the patients in the reported cohorts received THST, and, hence, there was no control group for comparison (14,31,34,37,41); in 1/11, there was a comparison group that did not receive THST, however, the results were not strati®ed according to that parameter, and, again, no comparisons could be made (22); in 3/11, serum thyroglobulin (Tg) was used as the primary parameter and no clinical results were reported (21,39,40); and ®nally, the remaining 2/11 studies did not present adequate information to make any conclusions whatsoever (26,36) (Table 1).

Although a total of 28 clinical trials was identi®ed, only 10 longitudinal, observational cohort studies were eligible for meta-analysis (15,17,19,20,24,27,30,32,33,35). The features of these 10 studies are shown in Table 2.
In the above studies amenable to meta-analysis, out of a combined cohort of 4,174 patients with ThyrCa, 2,880 patients (69%) were reported as being on THST. The average periods of follow-up ranged from 4.5±19.5 yrs. Excluding the study by Rossi et al. (24), in which only a range of time periods was reported regarding follow-up of the cohort, the remaining nine studies pertained to a total of 49, 951 patient-years. Patients receiving THST had a decreased risk of adverse clinical outcomes (RR = 0.73; CI = 0.60±0.88; P < 0.05); this is shown graphically in Figure 1. Results from these 10 studies were not homogeneous (by the Breslow-Day chisquared statistic; P = 0.001). However, removal of the two studies that failed to show a bene®t from THST, i.e. those of Cady et al. (20) and Esik et al. (33) resulted in homogeneity (Breslow-Day chi-squared statistic; P = 0.226), as well as consistent ®ndings for the remaining cumulative cohort of 3, 013 patients (RR = 0.38; CI = 0.292±0.493; P < 0.05).

Recommendations by experts from 18 published medical reviews or guidelines in the period spanning 1990±2002 were identi®ed, which addressed the role of THST for ThyrCa (3, 4, 50±65). Notably, three of these reviews are by the same author. Four of the reviews represent clinical practice guidelines developed by the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists/American Association of Endocrine Surgeons (AACE/AAES) (62), the American Thyroid Association (ATA) (55), the British Thyroid Association/Royal College of Physicians (BTA/RCP) (65), and the US National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) (58). Of the 18 opinion statements, only one failed to unequivocally support THST; this article by Cady (51) proposed that not all `low-risk' patients require THST. Although the remainder of the reviews supported the use of THST, the target level of TSH suppression and its duration (10±15 years postdiagnosis versus lifelong) was an area of disparity among these contributions. Two articles did not  identify a TSH target range at all, while another one only generically stated that `clinical judgment will be the guide for selecting a target TSH range'. Four reviews advocated suppressing the TSH to `lower than normal', but detectable levels in all patients. The most common view, as described in 5/18 reviews, including the AACE practice guidelines, was to reserve suppression of TSH to undetectable levels (<0.05 or <0.1 mU/l) for `high-risk' patients only and allow `low-risk' patients to have a serum TSH level below normal, but still detectable. Four of the reviews, including the BTA/RCP guidelines, were more stringent in their opinion and recommended that TSH be suppressed to undetectable levels in all patients. Due to lack of consistent opinions among experts on the suggested duration of THST, we were unable to analyze this parameter and make any relevant suggestion.

Although clinical information regarding temporal relationship and therapeutic bene®t, and biologic gradient for THST is currently not available, assessment of other criteria suggests a probable effect of THST on major adverse clinical events (Table 3).
Table 2. Statistical data from studies used in the meta-analysis.

and level of significance) Mazzaferri, 1994 (27) Disease recurrence RR 0.51, P = 0.014 Pujol, 1996 (32) Disease recurrence RR 0.25, P = 0.042 Cooper, 1998 (35) Disease progression RR 1.01, P = 1.0 Crile, 1971 (15) Death RR 0.28, P < 0.001 Young, 1980 (17) Death RR 0.34, P < 0.09 Wanebo, 1981 (19) Death RR 0.41, P < 0.001 Cady, 1983 (20) Death RR 1.93, P < 0.001 Rossi, 1988 (24) Death RR 0.30, P < 0001 Sanders, 1995 (30) Death RR 0.50, P = 0.41 Esik, 1997 (33) Death RR 3.53, P < 0.01

TSH has been shown to stimulate cell growth and invasion, as well as angiogenesis, in several in vitro and animal models of ThyrCa (66±68). It also inhibits thyroid malignant cell apoptosis (3). Based on these ®ndings, as well as the well-established trophic role of TSH in normal and hypertrophic ± but not malignant, e.g. goitrous ± thyroid cells, THST has been a widely accepted component of papillary and follicular ThyrCa management over more than four decades. However, due to the prolonged disease course and generally favorable prognosis of this malignancy, it has not been feasible to conduct prospective studies to formally evaluate the effects of THST upon disease outcomes. Additionally, in the face of established clinical dogma, it would be currently impractical to conduct a placebo-controlled randomized clinical trial to compare the effects of THST versus those of TH therapy at hormonal replacement doses in ThyrCa patients. Furthermore, as all currently available in vitro models of human well differentiated ThyrCa are considered suboptimal (69), the role of TSH in human ThyrCa initiation and progression remains unclear (6,10,70). Hence, in a purist's point of view, THST can be considered a controversial therapeutic modality. The increasing impetus for evidence-based medical practice (71,72) supports analysis of all available data in similar situations. Therefore, we hereby report our ®ndings of a research synthesis approach ± a meta-analysis variant ± to evaluate the effects of THST in ThyrCa. Meta-analysis is a frequently used technique to assess data from different clinical trials. However, when the strength and volume of individual studies are weak, it is essential to incorporate more qualitative information as well. The process utilized in our study was modeled after a research synthesis technique described by Csako et al. (42) and included: 1) a systematic review of the available biomedical literature, 2) meta-analysis of selected evaluable clinical trials, 3) compilation of recently published expert opinions, and 4) assessment of causality using modi-®ed Hill criteria (48).
Our analysis strongly supports a favorable effect of THST on adverse clinical outcomes (disease progression/recurrence and/or death) in patients with Thyr-Ca by both causality assessment according to the Hill criteria and meta-analysis of evaluable studies. These ®ndings are also corroborated by our analysis of opinions of experts published in reviews and editorials during the last 12 years, including the four clinical a Support for an association between thyroid suppression and reduction in major adverse clinical events (disease progression/ recurrence and/or death) is based on a 5-point scale: none (1), weak (2), possible (3), probable (4), strong (5). b Intervention-related: reduction rate higher with treatment than controls.
N/A: not applicable.
guidelines developed by the AACE/AAES (62), ATA (55), BTA/RCP (65), and the NCCN (58). Finally, very recently, data from the National Thyroid Cancer Treatment Cooperative Study (NTCTCS) registry became available, which also provide strong evidence that THST improves both disease-speci®c and overall survival in 1,276 patients of this registry with papillary ThyrCa. THST also improved progression-free survival in a subgroup from the above cohort with `low-risk' disease characteristics (73). Despite the widespread agreement on the appropriateness of using THST and our own ®ndings reported herein, the optimal level of TSH suppression among patients with differing clinical characteristics remains controversial. There are two predominant approaches to this issue: the ®rst tactic is for all patients to receive THST to suppress serum TSH below detectable levels, while the opposing stance is to reserve an `aggressive' level of TSH suppression for high-risk patients only. Following the latter rationale, low-risk patients should have target TSH values below the lower limit of the normal range, but still detectable.
At this point, it is important to note that different de®nitions for risk strati®cation of patients with ThyrCa were used among the various primary studies. Indeed, the classi®cation of patients according to their clinicopathologic features in risk groups (high versus low) is based on diverse tumor staging systems, depending on the study. In most of these systems, the high-risk group of patients includes those with: 1) age >45 yrs, 2) large primary tumors, 3) locally invasive disease deposits, 4) extracervical (disseminated) metastases, 5) histologically more `aggressive' variants of papillary and follicular Thyr-Cas or `high-grade' tumors, and 6) aneuploid malignancies.
With regard to titrating the degree of THST according to projected risk of recurrence or death from the malignancy in each group of patients, it should be kept in mind that supraphysiologic doses of TH can be associated with some adverse effects, and, thus, the risk-bene®t ratio for this therapy becomes less clear. Indeed, short-term side effects of THST may include generalized thyrotoxic symptoms, such as tremor, restlessness, or diarrhea, as well as arrhythmias and precipitation Ð or exacerbation Ð of angina. Potential long-term complications of THST include osteopenia/osteoporosis, as well as atrial ®brillation and its associated co-morbidities (74).
As far as limitations of our research synthesis approach are concerned, it should be noted that some of the individual studies analyzed herein were ¯awed by inadequate sample size, lack of randomization, lack of appropriate controls, lack of strati®cation according to degree of THST, and absence of masking. The majority of these studies also failed to present data in terms of clinical patient outcomes, and rarely focused exclusively on the effects of THST. Among studies that did present adequate information for analysis, additional inconsistencies were noted regarding the type of TH therapy (desiccated thyroid, liothyronine, or LT4) or its dose, the duration of THST, the target TSH concentration, the type of TSH assay used for measurement of its serum concentration, as well as the use of concurrently instituted therapies, such as radioactive iodine treatments and repeat surgery. Some studies used Tg as a surrogate marker of disease status. While the presence of abnormally elevated serum Tg levels re¯ects residual/recurrent ThyrCa, its impact on the longterm outcome of ThyrCa patients remains unknown. Regarding the detection of ThyrCa recurrence, bias due to changes in diagnostic trends over time cannot be excluded, given the fact that more recent studies bene®t from advances in various diagnostic techniques, e.g. more sensitive Tg assays and ever higher sensitivity of imaging modalities used for disease detection. Finally, in the meta-analysis part of our paper, we included three primary studies in which we could not exclude the possibility of double-registered patients. These are the studies by Cady et al. (20), Rossi et al. (24), and Sanders et al. (30) (also refer to Table 2). In view of the lack of availability of primary patient data from all authors, it is virtually impossible to disentangle the nuances of counting patients twice in our analysis, even with very sophisticated statistical methods.

In conclusion, based on available, and for the most part suboptimally designed, studies, THST appears justi®ed in patients with papillary and/or follicular ThyrCa. However, larger-scale, better designed studies, either prospective or derived from on-going cancer registries, such as the NTCTCS, are needed in the future to better de®ne the effect of THST upon major adverse clinical events in this malignancy.
We wish to thank Drs. Jacob Robbins and Paul M Yen, NIDDK, NIH, Bethesda, MD, for their thorough review of the manuscript, as well as constructive comments and suggestions. We would also like to thank Drs. Ga Âbor Tusnady, Olga E Â sik and Zoltan Szentirmay, of the National Institute of Oncology, Budapest, Hungary, for their kind provision of the primary data from their publication, which was included in our analysis.