Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is a highly aggressive form of thyroid cancer. A single institution thyroid cancer cohort of ATC was identified within the last ten years at our institution. Retrospective analysis revealed that the frequency of ATC was 0.5% (11/2,106 thyroid carcinomas). The average age at diagnosis of ATC was 74 years, and the female to male ratio was 1.2:1. ATC presented as a rapidly enlarging neck mass involving predominantly the left thyroid lobe (7/11, 64%). Cervical adenopathy was present in 7/11 (64%) of cases. Fifty-five percent (6/11) of patients had distant metastases at the time of diagnosis. Histologically, ATC closely simulated a large variety of soft tissue sarcomas, osteoclast-like giant cell-rich tumors, squamous cell, spindle cell, and small cell carcinomas, and anaplastic/large cell lymphomas. Four tumors (4/11, 36%) showed heterologous elements, including rhabdoid and chondroid differentiation. Immunohistochemical studies showed that all ATC lost TTF-1 and thyroglobulin expression while PAX-8 expression was identified in 36% (4/11) of tumors. Intense and extensive nuclear staining of p53 (>50%) and high Ki-67 proliferative rate (>30%) was seen in all ATC (11/11, 100%). Next generation sequencing revealed recurrent BRAF V600E and TP53 gene mutations. Individual examples of a BRAF G469A mutation in ATC with follicular carcinoma component, EGFR, PTEN, PIK3CA and FGFR3 mutations were also identified, while one case of ATC showed wild type sequencing with no identifiable alterations.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is defined by the World Health Organization classification of tumors of endocrine organs as a highly aggressive thyroid malignancy composed of undifferentiated follicular thyroid cells [1]. It usually affects elderly people, with a mean age in the mid-60s, and shows a female predominance . Accumulated clinical, pathologic, and experimental evidence has led to acceptance of the hypothesis that ATC transforms or evolves from preexisting differentiated thyroid carcinoma [1,2,5]. No precipitating events have been identified, and the mechanisms leading to anaplastic transformation of differentiated carcinomas are uncertain. More than 80% of patients with ATC have a history of goiter [5]. ATC represents the most aggressive extreme of the clinical spectrum of thyroid carcinomas, with a median survival on the order of 3 to 5 months following diagnosis and mortality rate of > 90% .
Due to the aggressive nature of the disease, prompt diagnosis is critical to determining appropriate treatment options. ATC is typically diagnosed based on clinical symptoms, unlike differentiated thyroid carcinoma, which is typically diagnosed after fine-needle aspiration (FNA) on a suspicious thyroid nodule. The discovery of somatic mutations integral in ATC will increase our understanding of tumor pathogenesis and should facilitate identification of mutations relevant to clinical treatment decisions and targeted therapy for this disease.
This study aims to 1) analyze the incidence of ATC based on the past 10 years of a large thyroid cancer cohort classified on current histologic criteria, 2) evaluate the morphologic features and establish an efficient diagnostic immunohistochemical panel to distinguish ATC from its mimickers, and 3) evaluate ATC for recurrent genetic mutations by sequencing.

Deeken-Draisey 4

A single institution thyroid cancer cohort with a total of 2106 resected thyroid carcinomas was identified within the last ten years at Northwestern Memorial Hospital. Clinical, surgical, and pathologic details were obtained from the medical record. The original pathology material was reviewed and the tumors were classified and staged on current criteria [1,33].
Within this cohort, 11 cases of ATC were identified. Representative/extensive tissue sections from the surgical specimens were fixed in 10% buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin. For routine microscopy, 4-µm-thick sections were stained with hematoxylin-eosin.

Immunohistochemical staining was performed using an automated immunostainer (Leica Bond-III, Leica Biosystems, Buffalo Grove, IL) and Bond Refine PolymerTM biotin-free 3,3' diaminobenzidine (DAB) detection kit. The antibodies applied in the study are listed in Table 1. A positive nuclear, cytoplasmic and/or membranous expression identified in 10% or more of neoplastic cells qualified as "positive (+)". The nuclear staining for Ki-67 was scored by calculating the number of positive tumor nuclei in 500 tumor cells.
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue from poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma (n=5), papillary thyroid carcinoma (n=5) and follicular thyroid carcinoma (n=5) served as a control for immunoprofile comparison with ATC.

Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) was extracted from FFPE tumor samples using the High Pure For library construction, 10 ng of DNA (measured using the Qubit DNA HS assay kit) was amplified using the Lung and Colon Cancer panel V2 (Ampliseq™, Life Technologies), and the Ion Ampliseq™ HiFi Master Mix (Ion Ampliseq™ Library kit 2.0). An amplicon library was thus generated for sequencing 1825 hotspot mutations in 22 genes including AKT1 (NM_05163), (NM_000455), TP53 (NM_000546). The amplicons were then digested, barcoded and amplified using the Ion Ampliseq™ Library kit 2.0 and Ion Xpress™ barcode adapter's kit (Life technologies) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The library prepared was quantified using the Qubit® fluorometer and the Qubit® dsDNA HS assay kit (Life technologies). 8pM of each library was multiplexed and clonally amplified on the Ion Chef using Hi-Q chemistry (Life technologies) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Finally, the template ISP were loaded on an Ion 316™ or on an Ion 318™ chip and sequenced on a PGM™ sequencer with the Ion PGM™ Hi-Q sequencing according to the manufacturer's instructions.
ALK (NM_004304), BRAF (NM_004333), CTNNB1 (NM_001904), DDR2 (NM_001014796), EGFR (NM_005228), ERBB2 (NM_004448), ERBB4 (NM_005235), FBXW7 (NM_033632),

Deeken-Draisey 6
The raw data was analyzed using the torrent suite software v5. . Cases for which the number of mapped reads was <100000 and/or the average base coverage was <300x were considered as non-informative.
The Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV) from the Broad Institute (http://www.broadinstitute.org/igv/) was used to visualize the read alignment and the presence of variants against the reference genome as well as to confirm variant calls by checking for strand biases and sequencing errors [34,35]. Only mutations reported in the Sanger Institute Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer (COSMIC) database (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic) were taken into account and silent or intronic mutations were not reported [36].

Insurance Portability and Accountability Act requirements, and has been approved by the Institutional Review Board at the Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine.

Retrospective analysis over the past 10 years revealed that the frequency of ATC in total thyroid cancers was 0.5% (11/2,106 thyroid cancers) (Table 2). The average age at diagnosis of ATC was 74 years, and the female to male ratio was 1.2:1. ATC presented as a rapidly enlarging neck mass. The most frequent symptoms were vocal cord paralysis and dyspnea secondary to airway compression. Characteristically, the duration of these symptoms was very short, ranging from only four weeks up to eleven months. The tumors involved the left (7/11, 64%) and right

Deeken-Draisey 7
(3/11, 27%) lobes. Bilateral involvement in 1/11 (9 %) of cases was also observed. Cervical adenopathy was present in 7/11 (64%) of cases. Fifty-five percent (6/11) of patients had distant metastases at the time of diagnosis. Nine of eleven patients (82%) died of disease (DOD). The mean length of follow-up was 14 months (range, 2-38).

Grossly, ATC presented as a large, necrotic, and hemorrhagic mass that was typically widely invasive, often replacing most of the thyroid gland parenchyma with infiltration of the surrounding soft tissue and adjacent structures of the neck (Fig. 1). The cut surface was brown or white with yellowish areas of necrosis and hemorrhages.

Histologically, all ATCs were hypercellular, widely invasive tumors composed of spindle cells, pleomorphic and osteoclast-like multinucleated giant cells, large monomorphic cells, small cells, and squamous cells, alone or in combination. The tumor cells contained single or multiple hyperchromatic nuclei, with inconspicuous or prominent nucleoli, and eosinophilic cytoplasm.
The tumor cells were arranged in sheets, fascicles or in a storiform pattern, resembling fibrosarcoma, undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma, anaplastic/large cell lymphoma, and giant cell tumor of bone (Fig. 2 A-C). Four tumors (4/11, 36%) showed heterologous elements, including rhabdoid and chondroid differentiation (Fig. 2D). Focal squamous differentiation with keratinization was also identified (3/11, 27%). A prominent neutrophilic stromal infiltrate was seen in one case (1/11, 9%). Residual foci of papillary or follicular thyroid carcinoma (Fig. 3A)
were found in 6 ATCs (6/11, 54.5%) (Table 2). Extensive tumor necrosis, abnormal mitotic activity and venous invasion were commonly identified.

Deeken-Draisey 8

Please see Table 4 for full results of the immunohistochemical studies. For the thyroid cell lineage biomarkers TTF-1 and thyroglobulin, all cases of ATC lost expression, while PAX8 retained expression in 36% (4/11) of ATC cases (Fig. 3B-D). The diagnosis of carcinoma was supported by positive staining for cytokeratins AE1/AE3 and/or CAM5.2 in tumor cells [Fig. 4A and 4B]. Strong p53 nuclear staining in ≥50% of the tumor cells and high Ki-67 proliferative index (>30%) was noted in all cases of ATC (11/11, 100%) (Fig. 4C and4D). Well differentiated (10/10, 100%) and poorly differentiated (5/5, 100%) thyroid carcinomas retained expression of thyroid cell lineage biomarkers (TTF-1, thyroglobulin, and PAX8). Ki-67 proliferative index was high (>30%) in poorly differentiated (5/5, 100%) and low (<10%) in all well differentiated thyroid carcinomas. (10/10, 100%) Immunostaining for p53 was patchy (10-30%), with weakmoderate nuclear intensity, in tumor cells in two cases of poorly differentiated carcinomas (2/5, 40%), and negative in all papillary and follicular thyroid carcinomas (0/10, 0%). All thyroid carcinomas failed to demonstrate nuclear β catenin staining and showed intact nuclear expression of mismatch repair proteins.

Among the tested ATC cases with sufficient material for NGS, 8/9 cases showed evidence of genetic alterations (Table 4). The most common genetic alterations included TP53 and BRAF genes involving 7/9 and 5/9 cases, respectively. The concordance between p53 nuclear overexpression and TP53 gene mutation was 78% of ATC (Table 4). BRAF V600E mutation was found in 4/5 cases, and all four cases were also associated with concurrent TP53 mutations.
Additionally, one case showed BRAF G469A mutation. Individual examples of EGFR, PTEN, PIK3CA and FGFR3 mutations were also identified, while one case of ATC showed wild type sequencing with no identifiable alterations involving the genes in Ion Ampliseq hotspots panel.

A N U S C R I P T

Retrospective analysis of 2,106 thyroid carcinomas at our institution revealed that the frequency of ATC was 0.5% (11/2,106). To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest single institution study with thyroid carcinomas classified on current histologic diagnostic criteria. The results are compatible to the previously reported incidence rate of 1% among whites in the largest epidemiologic study using Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) data in the United States [4]. In the SEER database, the ATC rate among each non-white female racial/ethnic group was elevated compared to whites and significantly so among Hispanics (2.9%); among men, the racial/ethnic differences were unremarkable [4]. The average age at diagnosis of ATC was 74 years, and the male to female ratio was 0.8, somewhat lower than the 0.99 for whites in the SEER study [4]. ATC involved predominantly the left thyroid lobe (7/11, 64%). In agreement with previous studies, the majority of patients with ATC presented with cervical adenopathy and had distant metastases at the time of diagnosis [1,2,7,21].
Histologically, ATC closely simulated a large variety of soft tissue sarcomas (sarcoma-like pattern), osteoclast-like giant cell-rich tumors (giant cell pattern), anaplastic/large cell lymphoma (lymphoma-like pattern), squamous cell, spindle cell, and small cell carcinomas (epithelial pattern). Combinations of these patterns were also identified. ATC demonstrated heterologous differentiation, including rhabdoid and malignant chondroid components. For the thyroid cell lineage biomarkers TTF-1 and thyroglobulin, all cases of ATC lost expression, while PAX8 retained expression in 36% (4/11) of ATC cases. Strong and diffuse p53 nuclear staining and high Ki-67 proliferative index was noted in all cases of ATC.
In sarcomatoid ATCs, neoplastic cells are morphologically indistinguishable from a primary sarcoma [1,2,7,10,11,13]. When a well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma component is lacking

Deeken-Draisey 10 and immunohistochemistry fails to demonstrate an epithelial differentiation and/or thyroid cell lineage biomarkers, this distinction could be really difficult [1,2,7,20,[23][24][25]. It should be kept in mind however that primary sarcomas of the thyroid are indeed very rare so that it has been suggested that all sarcomatoid tumors of the thyroid gland should be regarded as ATC until proven otherwise [7]. Metastases are possible as well and should be ruled out. Some rare variants of ATC contain heterologous rhabdoid, chondroid and osteoid components [1,2,7,17,18].
These are believed to be similar to malignant mixed Mullerian tumors of the gynecological tract and are probably due to metaplastic phenomena in carcinomas [7]. In the present study, the diagnosis of ATC was supported by positive staining for cytokeratins in tumor cells.
Osteoclast-like multinucleated giant cells are occasionally present and may be prominent, resembling similar tumors described in breast, pancreas, bone and soft tissue [7,12,14].
Osteoclast-like multinucleated giant cells in ATC are known to be reactive elements of monocytic/histiocytic lineage, immunohistochemically positive for CD68 and CD163, and apparently derived from histiocytoid mononuclear cells via cellular fusion [7].
ATCs with epithelioid appearance are histologically less heterogeneous than sarcomatoid tumors. Squamous differentiation with focal keratinization, spindle cell morphology, and lymphoepithelioma-like pattern characterized by histologic features similar to those of lymphoepithelioma of the nasopharynx were described in the largest series reported in literature and are most frequently seen in combination with spindle and/or giant cells patterns [1,2,7].
ATC with squamous differentiation are immunoreactive for p63, p40 and high molecular weight cytokeratins but are negative for thyroglobulin. In the lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma variant, there is not association with Epstein-Barr virus infection [7]. When a thyroid tumor is almost exclusively composed of squamoid elements it should be necessary to rule out direct invasion

Deeken-Draisey 11 from an upper airway primary or a metastatic process originating from the lung. Careful clinical examination is the most important clue, particularly to exclude metastases. The search of a welldifferentiated component, by extensive sampling of the surgical specimen, is also a helpful feature in identifying the tumor origin and it is mandatory in these cases.
Rarely, ATC can be paucicellular and sclerotic, the so-called 'paucicellular variant' [1,7,15,22]. This variant should be differentiated from Reidel's disease or IgG4-related disease of the thyroid. The diagnostic clues for identification of this rare variant of ATC include hypercellular foci containing abnormal pleomorphic cells, necrosis, and mitoses.
One major differential diagnosis that is critical to recognize is malignant lymphoma, especially anaplastic lymphoma or diffuse large B-cell lymphoma [2]. From a clinical point of view, these patients are usually older and have a history of goiter that is growing rapidly. In these cases, however, the goiter is most commonly related to true Hashimoto thyroiditis [2]. The diagnosis of malignant lymphoma of the thyroid, no matter the type, does not carry the same poor prognosis of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma; indeed, both radiotherapy and chemotherapy can be successful, and 60-75% of patients will enjoy remission and extended survival [2]. Unlike ATC, anaplastic/large cell lymphomas are cytokeratin negative and express lymphocytic and histiocytic markers.
Epithelioid angiosarcoma may cause some confusion with ATC [1,7]. Many of the reported cases showed positive staining with cytokeratins, similar to epithelial malignancies. The prognosis for these lesions are extremely poor.
The progression of thyroid cancer is thought to be the result of an accumulation of genetic and epigenetic lesions that lead to perturbations in two classical signaling pathways, the MAPK and the PI3K-AKT pathways, involved in cell proliferation and survival [7]. The molecular
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A C C E P T E D M A N U S C R I P T
pathogenesis of ATC includes mutations in BRAF, RAS, CTNNB1, PIK3CA, TP53, AXIN1, PTEN, and APC genes, and chromosomal abnormalities are common [1,2,8,9,26,27,29]. In the current study, mutations in BRAF V600, which are also present in papillary thyroid carcinoma, suggest that they could be early oncogenic events compounded by mutations in TP53 resulting in progression to the aggressive dedifferentiated ATC phenotype. Individual examples of a BRAF G469A and PTEN mutations in ATC with follicular carcinoma component were also identified. The BRAF G469A mutation has not been previously reported in ATC, although it has been reported in many other malignancies involving lung, lymphoid, large intestine and prostate (COSMIC) (cancer.sanger.ac.uk) [36]. This study provides further evidence that immunohistochemical detection of p53 protein accumulation does not always indicated the presence of a TP53 gene mutation.
ATC is one of the most aggressive malignant tumors in humans [
. No curative therapy exists for ATC; it is almost uniformly fatal [5]. Patients with disease confined to the neck at diagnosis have a mean survival of 8 months compared with 3 months if the disease extends beyond the neck [5]. Only 20% of affected patients survive for 1 year after diagnosis. In the present study, 82% (9/11) of patients with ATC DOD. Multivariate analysis identified age ≥70 years, presence of acute symptoms, leukocytosis (white blood cell count ≥10,000/mm), large tumor >5 cm, T4b tumor, and distant metastasis as significant risk factors for lower survival [21]. Univariate analysis showed that the best prognosis was seen in patients younger than 55 years and in those without distant metastases [28]. When used alone to treat ATC, surgery, radiotherapy, or chemotherapy rarely affects survival rates significantly. Therefore, multimodal therapy has increasingly become the treatment of choice for ATC [5,21,[28][29][30][31][32].

Deeken-Draisey 13
Molecular targets for ATC treatment are under development and EGFR has been extensively studied as a possible target [29]. Abnormal EGFR activation leads to EGFR mRNA and/or protein over-expression, which leads to cancer development and progression [29]. Aberrant EGFR signaling leads to cellular proliferation, angiogenesis, and cancer invasion and metastasis.
Recent studies have demonstrated that cetuximab and irinotecan synergistically interact to inhibit the growth of orthotic anaplastic thyroid carcinoma xenografts and result in 93% tumor growth inhibition [29,30]. BRAF mutation was found to be associated with proliferation of thyroid carcinoma cells. Thus, suppression of BRAF might have a therapeutic potential and BRAF mutation can be used as a prognostic factor [29]. A potential explanation for the poor efficacy of chemotherapeutic agents, including doxorubicin or cisplatin, might be the high rate of TP53
mutations [1,26,28]. In this context, a recent study showed high efficacy for the treatment of ATC with a high rate of TP53 mutation with concomitant docetaxel and radiation [30]. The results were remarkable with four of six patients achieving complete remission, and two patients showing partial response [30]. This suggests that a novel therapeutic approach is strongly warranted.
Overall, the data analyzing this large thyroid cancer cohort indicates that the frequency of ATC is very rare, 0.5%. Clinicians and pathologists should be aware of the morphologic variability and the metastatic propensity of this entity. The findings of the diagnostic immunohistochemical panel indicate that the loss of thyroid cell lineage biomarkers, with variable expression of PAX8 and cytokeratins, elevated proliferative index, and strong/diffuse p53 accumulation as an efficient biomarker panel to identify ATC. The cohort of ATC cases evaluated by NGS was too small to draw significant conclusions. In addition, the target NGS panel we used is relatively small and does not have coverage in genes other than those listed, and

Deeken-Draisey 14 may miss medium to large insertions and deletions. Copy number changes, structural variants or fusion events involving PAX8, BRAF, or NTRK genes cannot be identified by this panel.
However, our limited studies show findings consistent with previously reported increased frequency of TP53 and BRAF mutations. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported case of a novel BRAF G469A mutation in ATC with follicular component.

 The frequency of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma was 0.5%.  Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma closely simulated a large variety of non-epithelial neoplasms.  Extensive p53 expression was present in all anaplastic thyroid carcinomas.  BRAF G469A mutation was identified in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma with follicular carcinoma component. 
Figure 1 Figure 2 Figure 3

Deeken-Draisey 20