Background.-A delay in the diagnosis of differentiated thyroid carcinoma often leads to larger tumors, higher prevalence rates of distant metastasis, and earlier cause-specific deaths. Threshold tumor diameters for extrathyroidal growth, lymph node spread, and distant metastasis in papillary (PTC) and follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC) remain to be defined.
Methods.-A comparative correlation of primary tumor size and extrathyroidal growth, lymph node spread, and distant metastasis was performed for 500 institutional patients who received surgery for PTC or FTC.
Results.-There were 366 patients with PTC (73.2%) and 134 patients with FTC (26.8%). Multifocality (23.5% vs. 9.0%; P < 0.001) and lymph node metastasis (40.2% vs. 19.4%; P < 0.001) were more common in the patients with PTC than in those with FTC. Patients with FTC were older at first diagnosis (51.6 vs. 47.0 years; P ϭ 0.01) compared with the patients with PTC. The FTC tumors were almost twice as large (39.9 vs. 20.6 mm; P < 0.001), and patients had a higher prevalence of distant metastasis (17.9% vs. 6.3%; P < 0.001). When primary tumor diameter was accounted for, cumulative risks of extrathyroidal growth and lymph node metastasis were higher in patients with PTC than in patients with FTC (P <001; log-rank test). In striking contrast, the cumulative risk of distant metastasis was the same for PTC and FTC tumors of equal size (P ϭ 0.89; log-rank test) and increased once the primary tumor size was > 20 mm. Pulmonary metastasis was an earlier event than bone metastasis.
Conclusions.-The data suggested that earlier intervention is warranted to keep suspicious thyroid nodules from growing > 20 mm (or greater than T1) and spreading to distant organs.
᭤ Tumor size is a well-recognized variable that increases the risk of metastases and cancer-specific death. It has such a powerful prognostic effect that in most studies it is independent of age and other important risk factors in predicting outcome. [1][2][3] Most studies of tumor size simply estimate the risk by using a certain cutoff above which adverse events increase statistically. However, the study by Machens et al reports the cumulative risk of developing metastases as tumors grow larger. In effect, they show the smallest tumor size that first begins to affect prognosis. The threshold for developing extrathyroidal tumor growth and lymph node metastases was at 5 mm for PTC and 20 mm for FTC. The slope of these curves were significantly steeper for PTC than FTC, emphasizing the cumulative effect of increasing PTC tumor size on the development of extrathyroidal extension and lymph node metastases (P < 0.001)(see Fig 1 in original article). The threshold for developing distant metastases was 20 mm for both PTC and FTC, and cumulative risk, whether to bone or lung or both combined, was the same for PTC and FTC, with the curves for both tumor types being virtually congruent. Still, the slopes for lung metastases were steeper than those for bone metastases, implying that overall lung metastases occur with smaller primary tumors than do bone metastases (see Fig 2

The study by Machens et al did not take into account the effects of multiple tumors, but instead simply used the largest tumor diameter to estimate risk, as do most studies. Differentiated thyroid cancers with one or more anaplastic foci were not included in the study, nor were cases in which tumor size was unavailable, a group that more often had extrathyroidal tumor growth and tracheal invasion than did others in the study. The tumors in these excluded groups were presumably more difficult to measure because of the piecemeal surgical specimens typically obtained when invasive tumor is resected, and it is difficult to know how this would have changed their observations. Many studies suggest that PTCs smaller than 1 cm (microcarcinomas) pose little or no threat to survival. Still, recent studies show that PTC multicentricity and invasiveness is an important tumor feature that must be considered when applying the size axiom. For instance, Chow et al 4 found that despite the overall excellent prognosis for patients with papillary microcarcinomas (<1 cm), these tumors were associated with a 1% disease-related mortality rate, a 5% lymph node recurrence rate, and a 2.5% rate of distant metastasis. The risk of cervical lymph node recurrence increased 6.2-fold (P ϭ 0.01) and 5.6-fold (P ϭ 0.02) when lymph node metastases and multifocal disease were present at diagnosis, while age was not a significant factor in predicting disease recurrence or survival. This suggests that treatment of multifocal papillary microcarcinomas should be no different from that of patients with larger papillary carcinomas: total thyroidectomy with remnant ablation for most patients. This fits with the observations by Machen et al that the slope of the extrathyroidal extension and lymph node metastasis curve begins at 5 mm for PTC. It is not clear if this was mainly due to multifocal tumors in their study, but my guess is that it was.
Many studies suggest that 4 cm is the tumor size cutoff above which PTCs and FTCs display more aggressive behavior and develop more distant metas-5% 50% 90% 100%
Chapter 4-Thyroid Ͳ 273 tases than do smaller tumors. [5][6][7] This axiom is reflected in most thyroid cancer prognostic classification systems, 8 and is often included in diagnostic recommendations for evaluating thyroid nodules. 9 Still, this caveat does not give a clear picture about when the smallest primary tumors produce metastases, which is clinically the most important issue to the clinician and patient. The study by Machens et al shows that the threshold level is 20 mm for lung metastases and 30 to 40 mm for bone metastases from both PTC and FTC. This is a unique study that needs to be verified because it provides important new clinical insight about tumor size that is likely to affect management decisions.