© Gland Surgery. All rights reserved. Gland Surg 2018;7:473-486 gs.amegroups.comIntroduction Thyroid cancer is the most common endocrine gland malignancy worldwide and has increased in incidence over the past few decades (1,2). In fact, thyroid cancer is now the fifth most common cancer diagnosis in women; it is expected to become the second most common malignancy in women and ninth most common in men by the year 2030 . Despite the marked increase in incidence, especially of early/smaller lesions, there has been no change in thyroid cancer mortality (1,2). This suggests that we may be over-diagnosing and over-treating thyroid tumors that may never lead to symptoms or death . As a result, the latest guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of thyroid cancers from many international societies have shifted to focus on limiting unnecessary screening and treatment (2-5). The most recent American Thyroid Association (ATA) Management Guidelines for Adult Patients with Thyroid Nodules and Differentiated Cancer—considered the standard for the diagnosis and management of thyroid cancer in the US—were released in 2015 . Approximately 70% of these guidelines remain unchanged from the prior version released in 2009; however, there were key changes that were intended to directly alter clinical practice. These changes have resulted in controversy and represent opportunities for future research . It has long been known that differentiated thyroid cancers (DTCs), especially papillary thyroid cancers (PTCs), typically follow a more slow-growing and indolent course than many other malignancies, and historically a large number of these tumors were only diagnosed on autopsy following death by other causes (2,6). T aken together, Review Article Current controversies and future directions in the diagnosis and management of differentiated thyroid cancers Timothy M. Ullmann, Katherine D. Gray, Maureen D. Moore, Rasa Zarnegar, Thomas J. Fahey III Department of Surgery, New York Presbyterian Hospital, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA Contributions: (I) Conception and design: R Zarnegar, TJ Fahey; (II) Administrative support: None; (III) Provision of study materials or patients: None; (IV) Collection and assembly of data: None; (V) Data analysis and interpretation: None; (VI) Manuscript writing: All authors; (VII) Final approval of manuscript: All authors. Correspondence to: Thomas J. Fahey III. 520 East 70th St. Starr 8, New York, NY 10021, USA. Email: tjfahey@med.cornell.edu. Abstract: Despite the development of novel diagnostic, surgical, and chemotherapeutic approaches to differentiated thyroid cancers (DTCs), the diagnosis and management of these tumors remains controversial. The most recent American Thyroid Association (ATA) guidelines, released in 2015, reflect a recent shift towards less aggressive management for patients with DTCs. However, many clinicians have expressed concern that more conservative management will put patients at risk for disease recurrence and metastasis. In particular, the management of indeterminate nodules on fine needle aspiration (with special attention to genetic and epigenetic markers of malignancy), the extent of surgery for known differentiated cancers, the role of adjuvant radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy, and novel targeted treatments with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) represent current areas of uncertainty and opportunities for future research. In this review, we examine the current state of the art in these areas, and address some of the questions that remain. Keywords: Differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC); indeterminate thyroid nodules; radioactive iodine (RAI); tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs); American Thyroid Association guidelines (ATA guidelines) Submitted Aug 31, 2017. Accepted for publication Sep 07, 2017.  View this article at:  474 Ullmann et al. Current controversies in thyroid cancer © Gland Surgery. All rights reserved. Gland Surg 2018;7:473-486 gs.amegroups.comthe increasing incidence of thyroid cancer, especially of smaller tumors, and unchanged mortality have triggered a re-evaluation of the treatment for DTC. Accordingly, for those patients requiring surgical intervention, the extent of surgical resection and whether any adjuvant therapy is necessary remains controversial. Currently, much of the research on DTC has focused on several key areas where the optimal algorithm for diagnosis and treatment remains unclear: the management of patients with indeterminate cytopathology on fine needle aspirate (FNA); the extent of surgical resection required for those with differentiated cancer; the role of adjuvant radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy; and novel adjuvant therapies for locally advanced or metastatic disease. Management of indeterminate nodules on FNA cytopathology: role of molecular testing The Bethesda grading system for thyroid nodule FNAs, introduced in 2007, standardized the reporting of cytopathology results, and successfully and reliably stratifies thyroid nodules based on their risk of malignancy (7,8). Bethesda V lesions carry a 60–75% risk of malignancy, and there is largely a consensus recommendation for surgery for these patients (4,8). However, anywhere from 15–40% of FNA samples are scored either as Bethesda III or IV indeterminate lesions . These lesions carry a 15–30% risk of malignancy . Originally, repeat biopsy was recommended for Bethesda III lesions and diagnostic hemithyroidectomy was recommended for Bethesda IV lesions . However, the majority (70–85%) of surgical specimens from patients who undergo hemithyroidectomy for Bethesda III and IV lesions are ultimately benign, therefore resulting in seemingly non-therapeutic surgeries . Furthermore, hemithyroidectomy is not without consequences as up to 43% of patients will develop hypothyroidism requiring lifelong thyroid hormone supplementation . Consequently, much research has been focused on further characterizing these Bethesda III and IV indeterminate lesions to better identify patients at risk for underlying malignancy and to avoid unnecessary surgery in those with benign nodules. Although there is evidence that specific cytopathologic features of these lesions that may indicate a higher risk of malignancy , the 2015 ATA guidelines focus on molecular testing as a novel supplemental diagnostic tool . This is in large part due to recent data that demonstrates that certain genetic alterations, such as BRAFV600E and RAS mutations, and rearranged during transfection ( RET )/PTC and PAX8 / peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma-1 (PPARγ) translocations, have been shown to be predictive of malignancy (14-25). Additional progress has been made using gene expression of mRNA and microRNA to predict malignancy, and these assays have also been shown to improve our ability to distinguish malignant and benign lesions using FNA. Genetic alterations: BRAFV600E, RAS, RET/PTC, and PAX8/PPAR γ B-type RAF kinase is a serine-threonine kinase involved in the RAS-MAPK cell signaling cascade that is activated by phosphorylation of Thr598 and Ser601 (19,20,25). In approximately 40% of PTCs, a mutant form of the protein with glutamine substituted for valine at residue 600 ( BRAFV600E) mimics the activated wild-type protein and triggers constitutive phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and alteration of associated transcription factors leading to malignancy . Multiple studies have demonstrated association between BRAFV600E mutation and a more aggressive phenotype; a recent meta-analysis demonstrated that the mutation was associated with an increased rate of lymph node metastasis, extrathyroidal extension, resistance to RAI therapy, and even decreased overall survival . Other studies have shown a decreased disease- free survival . However, it remains to be seen whether preoperative knowledge of BRAF mutation status will affect operative planning and decision making . Regardless, the mutation is diagnostic of PTC, and can be used as an adjunct test in otherwise indeterminate thyroid FNA samples (19,20). BRAFV600E testing is presently included in many commercially available gene-based tools for diagnosis of thyroid cancer. The second most common group of genetic mutations in DTCs involve the RAS family of proteins, specifically KRAS, NRAS, or HRAS . Mutations in the RAS genes are found in less than 5% of all thyroid nodules , but are detectable in FNA specimens , and when present are nearly always associated with a follicular cytologic pattern  (see T able 1 ). RAS mutations are found in benign follicular neoplasms, and tumors with isolated RAS mutations are usually associated with less aggressive features and a more indolent course . However, despite their occurrence in benign lesions, a recent meta-analysis demonstrated that RAS mutations have a 93% specificity for 475 Gland Surgery, Vol 7, No 5 October 2018 © Gland Surgery. All rights reserved. Gland Surg 2018;7:473-486 gs.amegroups.commalignancy . This has not translated to a reliable single- gene marker for malignancy, as the positive and negative predictive values (PPV and NPV) in the same analysis were only 78% and 64%, respectively . Still, when combined with analysis of other genetic mutations, the RAS family of genes has become a useful data point in clarifying the risk of malignancy of indeterminate lesions. In fact, there is evidence that the risk of malignancy varies with the form of RAS that is mutated. One group demonstrated that the specific isoform of RAS that was mutated in follicular neoplasms determined the relative risk of malignancy, with 100% of KRAS mutant tumors being malignant, as compared to 74% for NRAS , and 56% for HRAS . In addition to genetic mutations, certain translocations have also been identified. The most common translocations known to occur in PTCs involve the RET gene, which codes for a tyrosine kinase that is normally not expressed in thyroid tissues (31,32). There are at least 13 different RET translocations identified in PTCs to date, and all are thought to trigger activation of the MAPK pathway leading to malignancy . A meta-analysis by Rodrigues et al. in 2012 found presence of a RET/PTC translocation had a 87% PPV for malignancy . The two most common translocations, RET/PTC1 and RET/PTC3 , have both been shown to be strongly associated with PTCs, and are thought to be nearly mutually exclusive with BRAF and RAS mutant tumors (32,33,35). T umors with the RET/PTC3 translocation are noted to more commonly be solid variant PTC and occur more frequently in patients with a history of radiation exposure (33,36-38). Earlier studies seemed to show an association between RET/PTC translocations, especially RET/PTC1 translocations, and a favorable prognosis (39-41). Recently, however, several studies have noted an association between RET/PTC3 translocation and distant metastases (27,36), and patients with RET/PTC positive tumors have been shown to have a disease pattern similar to patients with the BRAFV600E mutation . As our understanding of the prognostic impact of RET/PTC translocations becomes clearer, we expect that the marker will be increasingly important in the management of PTC. PAX8/PPAR γ translocations are the second most common translocations in thyroid cancers, and involve the fusion of the PPARγ gene with the thyroid specific transcription factor PAX8 . These translocations are found in up to 35% of follicular thyroid cancers, but also found in 2–13% of follicular adenomas and in 1–5% of PTCs—nearly always follicular variant (15-17,42,43). In a recent retrospective analysis by Armstrong et al. , 1.1% of PTCs were found to have this translocation. 16 patients were identified on pre-operative FNA, all of them were diagnosed as either benign or indeterminate lesions on FNA, however all were subsequently diagnosed with cancer; a 100% PPV . However, the translocation occurs with variable frequency in benign adenomas, obscuring it’s utility as a single molecular marker of malignancy . Genetic testing: ThyroSeq® and ThyGenX® In the US, these four genes have been combined with other, less common genetic alterations to form the basis of commercially available next generation sequencing assays. The developers of the ThyroSeq® assay demonstrated that the most recent iteration of the test, ThyroSeq® v.2, had a PPV of 77% in a population with a 28% incidence of malignancy in Bethesda IV lesions . However, as the authors note, there is still room for substantial Table 1 Common genetic alterations in differentiated thyroid cancers and their associated characteristics Gene(s) Type FrequencyApproximate risk of malignancyAssociated features