Objective: The objective of this study was to provide insight into the following: (a) the perceived level of, satisfaction with, and helpfulness of received information and unmet information needs among thyroid cancer (TC) survivors and (b) the relation between unmet information needs and impact of cancer (IOC). Methods: All patients diagnosed with TC between 1990 and 2008, as registered in the Eindhoven Cancer Registry, received a survey on information provision (European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire Information module) and IOC. Results: Thyroid cancer survivors (n = 306; response rate = 86%) indicated to receive no or only a little information about different aspects of their disease (27-86%), medical tests (20-27%), treatment (21-90%), and aftercare (86-91%). Almost half of the survivors (47%) were not at all or a little satisfied with the amount of information received; 31% found the received information not or a little helpful; a third of the patients (34%) indicated that they wanted to receive more information (defined as unmet needs). TC survivors with unmet informational needs scored significantly higher on both the positive (mean 3.2 vs. 2.9) and negative IOC scale (mean 2.5 vs. 2.2) compared with survivors without unmet needs (p < 0.01). In multivariate linear regression analyses, unmet information needs were positively associated with all positive IOC scales except positive self-evaluation (betas ranging from 0.16 to 0.24; p < 0.05), and all negative IOC scales except for appearance concerns (betas ranging from 0.12 to 0.19; p < 0.05). Conclusion: Thyroid cancer survivors experienced several areas of information provision as insufficient, suggesting room for improvement. Unmet information needs among TC survivors are associated with both positive and negative impacts of cancer.

In recent years, the incidence of thyroid cancer (TC) has increased drastically in the USA and most European countries [1][2][3]. In the Netherlands, the incidence of TC is 3.1 cases per 100,000 people per year, or 570 new patients [3]. As a result of the very good prognosis of differentiated TC (exceeding >90% 5-year relative survival rates), the number of TC survivors is growing (20-year prevalence of 2700 in 1990 vs. 5500 in 2010) [4].
As the number of TC survivors is growing, it is important to pay attention to the long-term effects of TC and its treatment. Recent studies showed that TC survivors report statistically significant and clinically relevant lower levels of physical and psychosocial functioning, and significantly more symptoms (e.g., fatigue, dyspnea, insomnia, and appetite problems) compared with an age-matched and sex-matched normative population [5][6][7]. TC-specific neuromuscular, concentration, sympathetic (problems of sympathetic nervous system, e.g., hot flushes or sensitivity to heat), and psychological problems were most strongly associated with worse self-reported physical and psychosocial functioning [5].
Despite the experience of symptoms, patients are sometimes informed by healthcare providers that TC is not a serious problem, partly because of the good prognosis for differentiated TC [8,9]. This attitude trivializes the importance of the condition and causes patients to feel dismissed as not having a serious disease [8]. Two recent international studies showed that TC survivors have substantial unmet psychosocial needs including information needs [9,10]. It is important to meet these information needs as research showed that satisfaction with received information is strongly associated with better healthrelated quality of life (HRQoL), lower levels of anxiety and depression, and more positive illness perceptions [11,12]. Next to these factors, information provision could also have an influence on the psychosocial impact of TC on the long run. Long-term survivors have unique concerns as well as positive experiences related to their cancer, which are not captured by standard HRQoL measures. To optimize aftercare for TC survivors, it is important to have insight into the perceived level of received information, the positive and negative impacts of TC on the lives of survivors, and the possible relation between unmet information needs and impact of cancer. Therefore, the aims of the current study were as follows: (a) to provide insight into the perceived level of, satisfaction with, and helpfulness of the received information and unmet information needs and (b) to study the relation between unmet information needs and impact of TC. We hypothesize that TC survivors report some unmet information needs especially regarding aftercare and that these unmet information needs are associated with higher negative but not positive impact of cancer.

This study is based on a population-based survey among TC survivors registered within the Eindhoven Cancer Registry (ECR) of the Comprehensive Cancer Centre South. The ECR compiles data of all individuals newly diagnosed with cancer in the southern part of the Netherlands, an area with 10 hospitals serving 2.3 million inhabitants [13]. All individuals diagnosed with TC between 1990 and 2008 as registered in the ECR were eligible for participation (N = 568). We excluded patients who had cognitive impairment or were too ill at time of the study (on the basis of medical records and advice from the attending medical specialist N = 31), had unverifiable addresses (N = 90), or died prior to the start of the study (according to the ECR, the Central Bureau for Genealogy, which collects information on all deceased Dutch citizens via the civil municipal registries, and hospital records; N = 6). One hospital declined to participate (N = 86). Questionnaires were sent to the remaining 355 patients. This study was approved by the certified Medical Ethics Committee of the Maxima Medical Centre in Veldhoven.

Data collection started in November 2010 and was performed within Patient Reported Outcomes Following Initial treatment and Long term Evaluation of Survivorship (PROFILES) [14]. PROFILES is a registry for the study of the physical and psychosocial impacts of cancer and its treatment from a dynamic, growing populationbased cohort of both short-term and long-term cancer survivors. PROFILES contains a large web-based component and is linked directly to clinical data from the ECR. Details of the PROFILES data collection method have been previously described [14].

Survivors' sociodemographic and clinical characteristics at the time of cancer diagnosis were available from the ECR. The ECR routinely collects data on tumor characteristics, including date of diagnosis, tumor grade, and stage according to the tumor-node-metastasis clinical classification [15], treatment, and patient background characteristics, for example, date of birth. Self-reported comorbidity at the time of survey was categorized according to the adapted Self-administered Comorbidity Questionnaire [16]. Questions on marital status, educational level, and current occupation were added to the questionnaire.

The Dutch version of the internationally validated European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire Information module (EORTC QLQ-INFO25) was used to evaluate the information received by TC survivors [17]. This 25-item questionnaire incorporates four information provision subscales: perceived receipt of information about the disease (four items), medical tests (three items), treatment (six items), and aftercare (four items). The answer categories for these questions were 'not at all', 'a little', 'quite a bit', and 'very much'. Additionally, the questionnaire contains eight single items on perceived receipt of information about other areas (e.g., different places of care); two items on the perceived receipt of written information and information on CD, tape, or video (yes/no answer categories); two items on the qualitative aspects satisfaction with the amount of received information and the helpfulness of the information disclosed (answer categories: not at all, a little, quite a bit, and very much); and two items on the wish to receive more or less information indicating unmet information needs (yes/no answer categories). Patients who answered with 'yes' on these last two questions also filled in an open-ended question about the topics they want to receive more information about. All scores of the four subscales and the single items satisfaction and helpfulness of the received information are linearly transformed to a scale of 0 to 100 according to the guidelines of the EORTC [17]. The questionnaire has been internationally validated, and internal consistency for all scales is good (α > 0.70), as is test-retest reliability (intraclass correlations > 0.70) [17,18].

The Impact of Cancer version 2 (IOCv2) was used to measure perceptions of positive and negative impacts of cancer on aspects of the survivors' lives. Development of the IOC was spurred by the need to measure aspects of survivorship not addressed by existing HRQoL measures [19]. The IOCv2 uses 37 items to measure four positive (altruism/empathy, health awareness, meaning of cancer, and positive self-evaluation) and four negative (appearance concerns, body change concerns, life interferences, and worry) subscales, which total to two summary scores (positive and negative impacts) [20]. Respondents indicate their level of agreement from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). Higher scores on the positive and negative impact scales indicate respectively greater positive and negative impacts of cancer.

Differences in sociodemographic and clinical characteristics between respondents, nonrespondents, and patients with unverifiable addresses or between patients with and without unmet information needs were compared using chi-square statistics for categorical variables and t-tests or analysis of variance for continuous variables. The nonparametric Mann-Whitney U-test or Kruskal Wallis was applied when normality and homogeneity assumptions of continuous variables were violated.
Differences in mean EORTC QLQ-INFO25 subscale scores and IOC single item and subscale scores between survivors with and without unmet information needs were compared by independent t-tests. Clinically meaningful differences were determined with Norman's 'rule of thumb', whereby a difference of ≈ 0.5 SD indicates a threshold of discriminant change in scores of a chronic illness [21].
Multivariate linear regression analyses were carried out in order to investigate the association between unmet informational needs and IOC subscale scores, corrected for a priori determined sociodemographic and clinical characteristics (age, sex, time since diagnosis, disease stage, comorbid conditions, educational level, and marital status) [22].
All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS version 19.0 (Statistical Package for Social Sciences, Chicago, IL, USA), and p-values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

Three hundred and six patients returned a completed questionnaire (response 86%). A comparison of respondents, nonrespondents, and patients with unverifiable addresses indicated that patients with unverifiable addresses were younger compared with nonrespondents and respondents (mean 52, 54, and 56 years, respectively; p = 0.04, these results have been published previously) [5]. No differences between groups were seen regarding sex, type of TC, stage of the disease, or primary treatment.
Sociodemographic and clinical characteristics of respondents are described in Table 1.

The single questions of the EORTC QLQ-INFO25 showed that most patients indicated to receive no or only a little information about different aspects of their disease (27-86%), medical tests (20-27%), treatment (21-90%), and aftercare (86-91%; Table 2). Almost half of the survivors (47%) were not at all or a little satisfied with the amount of information received, and 31% found the received information not or a little helpful. More than a third (34%) of the patients wanted to receive more information especially regarding the cause of their cancer (11%), complications and long-term effects of treatment and medication use (67%), aftercare and rehabilitation options (19%), and overall information on TC and the function of the thyroid gland (18%). Direct comparison between patients with (n = 100) or without unmet informational needs (n = 190) with regard to patient and tumor characteristics revealed no differences (data not shown) except for time since diagnosis, which was shorter for patients with unmet needs (7.9 years vs. 10.4 years; p < 0.01).
Patients with unmet information needs perceived to receive less information about the disease (mean 46 vs. 53; p = 0.01), treatment (36 vs. 44; p < 0.01), and aftercare (8 vs. 18; p < 0.01) and were less satisfied with the received information (37 vs. 60; p < 0.01). No significant differences between the two groups were seen on information about medical tests (64 vs. 68; p = 0.12) and helpfulness of the received information (59 vs. 63; p = 0.14)

t-tests showed that patients with unmet information needs scored significantly higher on scales of altruism and empathy (3.3 vs. 3.0; p < 0.01), health awareness (3.7 vs. 3.2; p = 0.05), meaning of cancer (2.7 vs. 2.4; p < 0.01), positive impact (3.2 vs. 2.9; p < 0.01), body change concerns (2.9 vs. 2.4; p < 0.01), life inferences (2.2 vs. 1.9; p < 0.01), worry (2.8 vs. 2.5; p <0.01), and negative impact scale (2.5 vs. 2.2; p <0.01; Table 3). This difference was clinically relevant for health awareness (difference of ≈0.5 SD).
In multivariate linear regression analyses including a priori defined confounding variables, unmet information needs were positively associated with all positive impact of cancer scales (betas ranging from 0.16 to 0.24), except positive self-evaluation (Table 4). Unmet information needs were also positively associated with all negative impact scales (betas ranging from 0.12 to 0.19), except for appearance concerns.

This population-based study showed that TC survivors perceived that they received no or only a little information about different aspects of their disease (27-86%), medical tests (20-27%), treatment (21-90%), and aftercare (86-91%). Almost half of the survivors were not at all or a little satisfied with the amount of information received; 31% found the received information not at all or only a little helpful; and a third of the patients indicated that they wanted to receive more information, indicating unmet informational needs; whereas 4% wanted less. TC survivors with unmet information needs scored significantly higher on both the positive and negative impacts of cancer scales compared with those without unmet needs.
Our results are in line with those of previous studies among other groups of cancer survivors (melanoma, endometrial, colorectal, (non-)Hodgkin, and multiple myeloma) showing that survivors received quite a bit of information about their disease, medical tests, and treatment; however, information on aftercare was scarce [23][24][25]. The unmet information need percentage for TC survivors (34%) was somewhat higher compared with that for other cancer survivor populations previously studied (15-28%) [23].  Moreover, an American study found that TC patients felt that they received inadequate information on lifestyle factors that might affect recurrence, negative consequences of body scans, symptoms of recurrence, causes of TC, how to manage side effects, and where to obtain the latest information on diagnoses, treatments, and side effects [10]. These topics are in line with the ones reported in our study, indicating that survivors are relatively satisfied with information related to their diagnosis, prognosis, and primary treatment but less satisfied with information related to long-term effects, recurrence, aftercare, and current information about the disease [10]. In accordance with our results, a recent international study showed that TC survivors have important unmet informational needs, which were reported as one of the most difficult aspects of their cancer experience [9]. A potential explanation for the fact that especially information about long-term effects and aftercare are reported as topics that patients want more information about is that healthcare providers are not aware of the health problems that TC patients are dealing with even long after their primary treatment.
In contrast to our hypotheses, our results showed that patients with unmet informational needs had both higher positive and negative impacts of cancer compared with those with no unmet needs. This is in line with three previous showing that cancer patients do experience both positive and negative impacts of cancer and that these two are not inversely correlated but may co-occur [26][27][28]. This may be an indication that mental health is not a single continuum with negative impact (distress) on one side and positive impact (growth) on the other side but rather represents a bivariate construct with two separate dimensions [29]. Therefore, it could be possible that patients with unmet information needs have a strong negative emotional reaction as well as a positive emotional reaction. Nevertheless, several other explanations for our findings could be given. First, patients with unmet informational needs might have a monitoring coping style, resulting in a continuous search for more disease information and lower levels of satisfaction compared with blunting patients [30]. This informationseeking style of monitoring patients can be seen as engagement coping aimed at dealing with the stressor. Engagement coping is associated with extraversion, conscientiousness, openness, and optimism [31]. It is therefore possible that patients with unmet informational needs have positive cancer experiences. The other way around, unmet informational needs are also associated with high distress levels and negative adjustment anxious-preoccupation and helplessness-hopelessness [11,32], which could explain the negative impact of cancer for this group. Second, as disease-related information is often emotionally loaded, it could be that part of the survivors forget or repress a substantial amount of the received information. This blunting style of avoiding disease-related information is often seen in the diagnostic phase or when the disease progresses.
Disengagement coping is associated with denial, withdrawal, and wishful thinking [33]. Blunting patients often use various cognitive strategies such as belief, posttraumatic growth, or benefit finding to try to counteract the negative effects of cancer [34]. In this way, it is also possible that these blunting patients experience both positive and negative impacts of their cancer. More research into the relation between perceived information provision and coping styles needs to be conducted. Third, survivors without unmet information needs could be well adjusted to their cancer diagnosis; they accept their disease history and returned to 'normal' life. In that case, they do not experience explicit negative or positive impacts of cancer. Fourth, as the direction of the relation could not be determined, it might also be possible that the positive and/or negative impact of cancer leads to more questions and unmet information needs among cancer survivors.
Irrespective of the direction of the found relations between unmet information needs and impact of cancer, our results highlight the importance to satisfy the patient by meeting their information needs and by adapting the way of providing information to the coping style of the individual patient. The information needs of a patient can be unraveled by consulting the patient himself or herself and regularly checking the understanding of the patient [35,36]. Furthermore, healthcare practitioners need to become aware of the health problems that TC survivors are dealing with even years after diagnosis. Long-term TC survivors report persistent problems including negative effects of thyroid hormone withdrawal for radioiodine follow-up procedures, fear and uncertainty related to a cancer diagnosis, feelings of diagnosis being dismissed as not serious, confrontation with daily medication use, and fluctuating hormone levels [7,37]. Therefore, identifying survivors who may experience physical and/or psychological problems and addressing these problems by for instance giving appropriate information may be important objectives of care and can possibly lead to more positive and less negative impacts of cancer for this group of survivors.
The present study has limitations that should be mentioned. First, our results are not generizable to anaplastic TC patients as they were not included in our study because of their worse prognosis. Second, the cross-sectional design of this study limits the determination of causal associations between the study variables. The relation between perception of received information and impact of cancer can be bidirectional; for example, adequate information provision can lead to improved HRQoL; however, high levels of distress can also inhibit information processing. Furthermore, because the mean time since diagnosis was almost 10 years, this could have biased the perception of the patients of the information they received. In addition, the EORTC QLQ-INFO25 only measures the information patients indicated to have received; it is not clear how much information was actually 951 Information needs and impact of cancer provided. It would therefore be interesting for future studies to compare data on actual information provision with data from self-reported questionnaires.
In conclusion, the present study shows that TC survivors experience several areas of information provision as insufficient, suggesting room for improvement. The finding that unmet informational needs were associated with both negative and positive impacts of cancer highlights the importance of a personalized care approach for TC survivors.

No information at all A little information Quite a bit information Very much information Subscale information about disease (mean = 50.