Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma is one of the most aggressive and deadly cancers in humans and accounts for one to two cases per million persons annually. The rarity of this malignancy and the rapidity by which it grows has been a major barrier to progress in finding effective therapies. Thus, the treatment that is the current standard of care for these patients is largely palliative, and few are cured; however, novel therapies and approaches are being studied in patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma and are delineated herein.

Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma is a fast growing tumor that is usually derived from a more well-differentiated thyroid cancer, although it can arise de novo. As a result of how rapidly patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma experience progression, it is critical to confirm the diagnosis, stage the patient, and begin the appropriate therapy in a timely fashion. Similar to acute leukemias, diagnosis of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma should be treated as a medical emergency, which reflects the aggressivenessofadisease withanoverallsurvival(OS) of approximately 5 months. 1 Unfortunately, many patients are only offered hospice care because of incurability, dismal prognosis, and complexity and toxicity of treatment. In the past, few, if any, clinical trials were available to these patients; however, novel clinical studies at several tertiary referral centers represent signs of hope for an otherwise nearly uniformly fatal disease.

Patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma present with a rapidly growing thyroid or neck mass that generally causes compressive symptoms, including dysphagia, dysphonia, and dyspnea. Patients with large thyroid masses or those who have a history of a rapidly expanding neck mass should raise suspicion for a diagnosis of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma. Approximately one third of patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma present with distant metastatic disease at the time of diagnosis. 2 Because anaplastic thyroid carcinoma tumors are undifferentiated, they do not behave like a normal follicular thyroid cell, and, thus, they do not concentrate radioactive iodine and make little or no thyroglobulin.

Diagnosis of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma is usually made with fine-needle aspiration or core biopsy. As a result of the large amount of necrosis that can be present in the tumor, pathology from biopsy can be difficult to interpret. Many patients undergo surgery for a differentiated thyroid cancer and are found to have both anaplastic and differentiated thyroid carcinoma. These patients should be treated as having anaplastic thyroid carcinoma instead of undergoing unnecessary and ineffective therapies, such as radioactive iodine, that can delay such effective therapies as chemotherapy and/or radiation.
Differential diagnosis of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma includes thyroid lymphoma, well-differentiated, poorly differentiated thyroid cancer, and metastasis to the thyroid from a solid tumor. Thyroid lymphomas are responsive to rituximab plus cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone, and should never be treated surgically; the prognosis is far better than that of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma, and, thus, it is important to diagnose this treatable malignancy correctly.

Multistep dedifferentiation is common in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma; therefore, the finding of early event mutations, such as BRAF and RAS, are seen in 25% and 28% of these tumors, respectively. TP53 mutations are the most common mutations found in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma and are a late genetic event. PIK3CA mutations are also late event mutations and are seen in 13% of patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma. Table 1 shows the approximate frequencies of the most common mutations, compiled from three sources (COSMIC, 3 Kunstman et al, 4 and Landa et al 5 ). Whereas TP53 and PIK3CA mutations are seen in well-differentiated thyroid cancers, they are uncommon. 6 Although the American Thyroid Association guidelines, 2 published in 2012, do not advocate molecular testing of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma tumors, we believe that testing of these tumors is imperative. BRAF V600E mutations are actionable, and selective BRAF inhibitors have shown efficacy in progressive, metastatic, or unresectable differentiated thyroid carcinoma. 7,8 This is now being tested in patients with BRAF-mutated anaplastic thyroid carcinoma and may hold promise. Uncommon genetic aberrations, such as TSC1 mutation and ALK rearrangements, have been described in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma in patients who have responded to everolimus and crizotinib, respectively. [9][10][11] Thus, finding an actionable mutation to match a targeted therapy is critical in this disease. It should be noted that molecular testing can take 2 to 3 weeks because of the time it takes to retrieve the tissue and perform the test. Time is of the essence in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma, and, consequently, it is advisable to perform the test as soon as possible.

Because anaplastic thyroid carcinoma metastases can arise virtually anywhere, imaging of the entire body is necessary to correctly stage patients. Cross-sectional imaging of the neck, chest, abdomen, pelvis with contrast, magnetic resonance imaging of the brain with contrast, bone scan, and/or positron emission tomography and computed tomography scans are our preferred set of imaging in these patients. Staging should be done in an expeditious manner but should not delay therapy or referral to a center with expertise in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma whenever possible. These centers should prioritize patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma, recognizing that they have an urgent diagnosis. Programs such as Facilitating Anaplastic Thyroid Cancer Specialized Treatment, or FAST, at MD Anderson Cancer Center are designed to improve access timeto patients withanaplastic thyroid carcinoma so that they are evaluated by an expert multidisciplinary team and staged, with treatment initiation within weeks. 12 American Joint Committee on Cancer staging classifies all patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma as having stage IV disease as a result of the high mortality of the disease. 13 Stage IVA and IVB patients have intrathyroidal tumors (IVA) and extrathyroidal tumors (IVB) and no distant metastatic disease, whereas stage IVC patients have distant metastasis.

Curative intent treatment is multimodal and consists of surgery (R0 or R1 resection) and external beam radiation therapy with radiosensitizing chemotherapy (Fig 1). At the time of evaluation, the vast majority of patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma have extensive disease beyond the thyroid gland that is often found to be invading or encasing surrounding structures, such as the trachea, larynx, esophagus, and carotid artery. Most patients are unresectable at diagnosis; therefore, the earlier the diagnosis is made and the patient referred to a tertiary care center with expertise in advanced thyroid cancers, the greater the chance the patient may be a surgical candidate. For the rare patient who is diagnosed with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma that is confined to the thyroid gland, surgery followed by postoperative chemoradiation therapy offers potential for cure. Given the propensity for rapid recurrence after surgery, postoperative radiation therapy should be initiated as soon as feasible.
Before any treatment, patients should have an upper airway evaluation, generally via flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy, to evaluate the function of the vocal cords and any degree of laryngeal edema, compression, or invasion. If the patient does not have a tracheostomy tube before radiation therapy, the airway can quickly become unstable as a result of radiationinduced tumor and/or laryngotracheal inflammation, edema, and thickened mucous, which compound pretreatment airway compromise related to direct effects of the tumor and/or vocal cord paralysis.

Similar to curative intent treatment, palliative intent treatment is often multimodal. Palliative therapy is used in patients whose tumor cannot be meaningfully resected. The first consideration in palliative therapy is a discussion with the patient regarding the option of a tracheotomy, as a tracheostomy tube can provide temporary relief of difficulty breathing; however, the downside of a tracheotomy is an immediate worsening of quality of life in terms of speech, swallowing, stomal care with a tracheostomy tube, and a tract for future direct tumor growth or extension. For patients who elect for supportive care only and to not undergo tracheotomy, a discussion should be initiated regarding the need for involvement of a palliative care specialist, as these patients will often need increasing narcotics to manage anxiety and air hunger associated with progressive shortness of breath.
For patients who plan to undergo palliative radiation therapy but who have airway compromise, tracheotomy should be done before initiation of radiation therapy, as progression of airway symptoms could exacerbate during radiation therapy. As a result of substantial technical difficulties with tracheotomies in patients with large neck malignancies, these tracheotomies should generally be undertaken in a tertiary referral center. It is important that patients have a realistic expectation of potential significant problemswith tracheostomy tubes in the setting of rapidly growing anaplastic thyroid carcinoma, including the possibility that the tumor could continue to progress through the tracheostoma and/or ultimately render the tracheostomy tube nonfunctional because of tumor growth within the tracheal lumen or distal compression of the trachea beyond the extent of the tube.
For patients who present with disease for which definitive surgical resection is not possible, those without distant metastatic disease (stage IVB) can be offered the option of external beam radiation to the neck with radiosensitizing chemotherapy, with the goal of achieving local tumor regression and the potential of durable local control as well as to avoid the morbidity of uncontrolled neck disease.
Palliative and hospice care treatment of patients with widely metastatic disease (stage IVC) is considered for those who do not wish to undergo treatment or who have poor performance status. Patients who are candidates for systemic therapy should be considered for clinical trials. All patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma, regardless of the stage of the disease, should undergo counseling regarding advanced directives.

Initiation of radiation therapy should be pursued urgently after appropriate airway evaluations and management. The presence of distant metastases does not necessarily preclude the use of palliative local-regional therapy to treat or prevent symptoms of airway or esophageal compromise; however, patients with distant metastatic disease, especially those with moderate-to large-volume disease may also be considered for upfront systemic therapy.
Given the rapid doubling time and the relative radioresistance of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma, various altered fractionation radiation therapy schedules have been used to intensify local therapy, whereby multiple smaller fractions are administered twice daily to shorten the treatment schedule, escalate the total radiation dose, or both. 15 Whereas there is no standard radiation therapy dose or schedule for anaplastic thyroid carcinoma, better outcomes have been observed for those who are able to receive a higher radiation therapy dose (. 50 Gy). 14 Because concurrent chemotherapy is often incorporated, and the radiation treatment volume can be quite large and include a significant part of the larynx and cervical esophagus, the potential for significant treatment-related toxicity must be carefully balanced against the general condition of the patient, treatment goals, and overall prognosis. Significant swallowing dysfunction before, during, or after treatment can be problematic, and patients should be evaluated and managed by a qualified speech language pathologist. A modified barium swallow assists in evaluating the safety of patient swallowing. Common chemotherapy regimens used for radiosensitization in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma are listed in Table 2. Addition of targeted therapy alongside concurrent chemoradiation is presently being investigated in a cooperative group study (NCT01236547).
NEOADJUVANT AND ADJUVANT CYTOTOXIC CHEMOTHERAPY Small, retrospective trials have been reported with cytotoxic chemotherapy in the neoadjuvant and adjuvant setting. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy is often used with the intent to evaluate disease biology and allow resectability of stage IVA and IVB tumors that were initially deemed unresectable. 16,17 Higashiyama et al 18 reported a response rate of 33% with weekly paclitaxel in nine patients with stage IVB disease. Four patients became amenable to curative intent surgery and adjuvant therapy and were alive and disease free at 32 months. A Japanese series of 40 patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma who were treated with neoadjuvant weekly paclitaxel for 4 to 8 weeks revealed that 33 patients (82.5%) achieved stable disease or partial response (PR).
Of these 33 patients, 25 underwent surgery followed by additional paclitaxel for 4 to 8 weeks in the adjuvant setting, and 16 patients proceed to consolidation radiation therapy. The group that completed multimodality treatment achieved long-term survival. 19 Nanoparticle albumin-bound paclitaxel has also been evaluated in five consecutive patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma, with four patients achieving clinical response. Two patients who were initially deemed inoperable were able to undergo successful resection. 20 The benefit of adjuvant chemotherapy as a single modality is uncertain and it is usually not indicated in patients with intrathyroidal (stage IVA) anaplastic thyroid carcinoma; however, chemotherapy is often used in combination with radiation therapy after R0 or R1 thyroidectomy, at the cost of increased toxicity. [21][22][23][24] The most common drugs used in the concurrent setting are described in Table 2.
A multimodal, aggressive approach to anaplastic thyroid carcinoma that includes surgery, followed by chemoradiation, and then adjuvant chemotherapy has been studied. 25 Twentynine patients who were considered eligible for definitive intent treatment were enrolled in a clinical trial from 2003 to 2015. The majority of patients underwent R0 and/or R1 surgeries. Radiosensitizing chemotherapies were administered with 66 Gy of intensity-modulated radiation therapy. Chemosensitizing agents were continued in the adjuvant period as tolerated by patients. The majority of patients had stage IVB disease, and median OS was 22.4 months for the entire cohort. This multimodal treatment of patients with good performance status and who are surgical candidates seems to be a reasonable approach.

The impact of single-modality palliative chemotherapy on survival of patients with metastatic anaplastic thyroid carcinoma is unclear because of the absence of large randomized trials. Taxanes, doxorubicin, and platin have shown activity as a single agent or in combination and render response rates ranging between 15% to 25%. [26][27][28] Dosages and frequency recommendations for these drugs are listed in Table 2. Fosbretabulin in Anaplastic Cancer of the Thryroid is the largest randomized trial to be conducted in patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma; however, it stopped early as a result of slow accrual. 29 In this study, 80 patients (90% with stage IVC disease) were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive carboplatin and paclitaxel with or without fosbretabutalin for six cycles, followed by maintenance fosbretabutalin. Fosbretabutalin is a tubulin-binding compound that targets tumor neovasculature.
Overall response rate was 20% for the carboplatin, paclitaxel, fosbretabulin arm and 16% for the carboplatin, paclitaxel arm. Median OS was 5.2 months for the experimental arm versus 4 months for the control arm. Results did not reach statistical significance (P 5 .22).

Although the pace of progress toward developing targeted therapies for anaplastic thyroid carcinoma is slow, there has lately been some promise. Molecular targeted therapy trials in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma have been conducted under the basket protocol design and have been largely directed at targeting BRAF mutations. Other mutation-specific trials, such as those that target PIK3CA, HRAS, and ALK, are also available for patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma, but these mutations are even rarer than BRAF mutations in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (13%, 4%, and 1.5%, respectively). Targeted therapy against the tumor microenvironment, such as potent antiangiogenics and immunotherapies, may be the most feasible trials as specific mutations are not required for study entry.

Case reports of patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma who responded to selective BRAF inhibitors have led to enthusiasm for testing in clinical trials. 30,31 Two basket trials have completed enrollment, of which one has reported results. Single-agent vemurafenib was tested in a small cohort of seven patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma. Two patients achieved a response to therapy-one complete response [CR] and one PR-and these were durable responses. Four patients had progression of disease as their best response and one was not evaluable. Another basket trial using vemurafenib (NCT02091141) is ongoing. Dabrafenib in combination with the MEK inhibitor trametinib is currently enrolling (NCT02034110).
mTOR Inhibitors Mutations in genes involved in the activation of the PI3K/AKT/ mTOR pathway is found in approximately 30% to 35% of anaplastic thyroid carcinomas and are potentially targetable. 5 A phase II trial using everolimus in aggressive thyroid cancers included five patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma. Three patients progressed, one patient had stable disease, and one achieved a near CR. 32 This remarkable near CR lasted for 18 months in a patient with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma who harbored a TSC2 mutation. 10

Sorafenib is a multikinase inhibitor that targets vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR), platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR), and RAF. In a phase II trial evaluating sorafenib in 10 patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma, no objective responses were seen and median OS was 5.4 months, which called into question the benefit of this agent in this patient population. 33 Two additional trials studying sorafenib in thyroid carcinomas included six patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma, and no responses were documented. 34,35 Similar to sorafenib, pazopanib-a multikinase inhibitor including VEGFR, PDGFR and c-kit-demonstrated no activity as a single agent in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma. Fifteen patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma were treated with pazopanib in a single-arm, phase II study, with no responses documented by RECIST (Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors) and a median OS of 111 days. 36 Takahashi et al 37 reported a phase II trial using lenvatinib, a newer, small-molecule VEGFR inhibitor, in differentiated thyroid cancer, medullary thyroid carcinoma, and anaplastic thyroid carcinoma. The anaplastic thyroid carcinoma cohort was small, consisting of only 11 patients; however, results were encouraging, with three PR, seven with stable disease, and one patient experiencing progression of disease. Median OS was 10.6 months, and median progression-free survival was 7.4 months. An international, phase II trial of lenvatinib in patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma is underway (NCT02657369). Lenvatinib is currently approved for treatment of differentiated thyroid cancer in the United States, but is approved for all subtypes of thyroid cancer in Japan.

Crolibulin is a small molecule that destabilizes microtubules and disrupts vascular endothelial cells. A phase I and II study evaluating crolibulin and cisplatin in solid tumors enrolled 16 patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma in the dose-escalation phase. Of 16 patients, one achieved a PR and one achieved a CR that lasted . 1 year. Unfortunately, the phase II portion of the trial was not completed because of slow accrual. 38 On the basis of preclinical activity in preclinical models, efatutazone, an oral peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-g (PPAR-g) agonist, was tested in combination with paclitaxel in a phase I study that included 15 patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma. 39 The combination was well tolerated, and one patient achieved a PR. A randomized phase II study is ongoing to evaluate the activity of efatutazone combined with paclitaxel versus single-agent paclitaxel in patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (NCT02152137).
Despite being uncommon, anaplastic thyroid carcinoma can harbor oncogenic mutations in the ALK gene. 9 Dramatic responses to the ALK inhibitor, crizotinib, have been reported in a patient with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma who harbored ALK rearrangement, with 90% shrinkage of targeted lesions lasting $ 6 months. 11 A second generation ALK inhibitor is currently being studied in patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma who harbor ALK aberrations (NCT02289144).

Checkpoint inhibitors, in particular, anti-programmed death 1/ programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1), have shown encouraging activity in a wide range of solid tumors. Although no definitive predictive biomarkers have been identified, high tumor burden and PD-L1 expression in the tumor and microenvironment cells correlate with improved patient outcomes. 40,41 An analysis of immune markers in a small cohort of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma samples revealed abundant infiltration of inflammatory and immune cells and high expression of PD-L1 in tumor cells. 42 These preliminary findings associated with a high rate of mutations in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma suggest that checkpoint inhibitors might be active in patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma and deserve investigation.

Genotyping of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma samples has shed light on the mutational landscape of this rare disease with a dismal prognosis. Case reports and small series have shown promising activity of biomarker-matched targeted therapy, whereas preliminary immune profiling of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma samples suggests a potential role for checkpoint inhibitors. Integration of targeted therapy and immunotherapy into the multidisciplinary management of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma has great potential to improve patient outcomes and should be investigated in prospective clinical studies. Although a relatively large number of patients will be required for enrollment of such trials as these to obtain regulatory approval for novel therapies in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma, we believe this can be achieved with a coordinated international effort.